,hs
Parasara
Sastra
of
{QeqttT{rr q}<t {ilftm
vol, I
En'g I ish t ran s I ation, commenlary,
annotation and editing
by
R. SANTHANAM
Ranjan PublicationsBrihat
Hora
MAIIARSHI PARASARA
rqfv rarrc ga
t 6 Ansari Road, Darya Ganj, 'ri*li New Delhi-l looo2 $"aiul../l{-^ ., \r* I
Ch. DetailsCONTENTS
Preface by translator
T, THE CR.EATIOT'I
2. GREAT TNCARNATI)N| QF THE LORD)
T PLANETARY CHARACTERS AND DESCRIPTION
Namos of planets, benefics and malefics, planetary
; governances, cabinet, complexions, deitics, sex, com-
pounds, castes, description of planets from Sun to
Ketu, Saptha Dhatus, Ritus, planetary tastes, strc-
ngths, trees; Dhatu, Moola & Jeeva divisions, exalta-
tion and debilitation, additional dignities, natural
relationships, temporary relationships, Upagrahas,
effects thereof, calculation of Gulika etc., Gulika'e
exact position, Pranapada, etc.
4. ZODIACAL SIGNS DESCRIBED
Importance of Hora, Names of signs, Limbs of Kala-
purusha, classification of signs, 12 signs described,
and Nisheka Lagna.
5. SPECIAL ASCENDANTS
Bhava Lagna, Ghatika Lagna, Hora Lagna, Use of
special ascendants, Varnada Dasa and effects of
Varnada.
6. THE SIXTEEN DIYISIONS OF A SIGN
Names of the 16 vargas, Ragi and Hora, Decanate,
Chaturthamsa, Sapthamsa, Navamsa, Dasamsa,
Dvadasamsa, Shodasamsa, Vimsamsa, Siddhamsa,
Bhamsa, Trimsamsa, Chltvarimsamsa, Akshave'
damsa, Shashtiamsa, Varga classification, eto.Page
l0
t7'
n
24
48
67
4
7- DIYISrcNAL CONSI DERATION
Use of tbe t6 divisions, Hora, Decanate anti Trimsa-
msa efrects, Vimsopaka strength, Vimsopka propor-
tional evaluation, other sources of strength, Dasa
effccts with Vimsopaka strength, names of bhav.as,
indkations from houses, etc.
8, ASPECTS OF THE.S/Gil.S
Sign aspects, phnctary aspects, aspectual diagram etc.
g. EYILS AT BIRTH
Short life combinations, evils to mother, evils to
fathet, and about parcnts'
IO. ANTIDOTES FOR EVILS
11, IUDGEMENT OF HOASES
Indications ofhouscs form lst to l2th, prosperity or
rnnihilation of a house.
12. EFFECTS OF FIRST HOI]SE
Physical comforts, bodily beauty, other benefits,
coited birth, birth of twins, to be nurtured by three
mothers, Moon equated to ascendant, decanates and
bodily limbs and a$ectation to limbs.
13. EFFECTS OF THE 2nd HOUSE
Combinations for wealth, and for poveriy, loss of
wealth through the king, expenses on good accoutrts,
fame, cffortless acquisition' eyes' truthlessness.
14. EFFECTS OF TttE 3rd IIOUSE
Female and rnale cobom, number of brothers and
ristcrs, advorec,Planets.
15. EFFECTS OF THE 4th TIOUSE
Houeing gomfortt, misccllaaeous, rqlatives, long-
. living mother, happiness to mother,l quadrupeds,
dumbnerc, conveyangcs9l
105
109
118
120
t26
t32
t37
r42
,5
16. EFFECTS OF THE ,Ih HOUSE
Happiness through children, no offspring, dcath of
. firsi child, difficult Brogeny' adopted issues, 3
mothers and 2 fathers, many children, obaining
daughters, questionable birth, mean children' child
at the age or 30,36, 40,32,33and 56 and number of
ohilcircn.
17. EFFECTS OF THE 6th HOUSE
Ulccr/bruises, relatives affectod, facial diseasel'
tcprosy, diseases in general, timing of illness, unfortu-
nut" yott, loss thtough enemies, inimical sonr and
fear from dogs.
l8: EfiFECTS OF THE 7th HOaSE '
Sick wife, excessive libidinousners, death of wife,
many wives, mlsceltaneous mattersr worthy spouse'
evlls to spouse, loss of spouse' lack of conjugal
. ' felicity, time of marriage, timing of wifc's death'
throe marriages and shortilved wlfe.
Ig. EFFECTS OF THE 8th IIO(ISE
Long life, short life, Saturn and l0th lord in longe-
vitY.
20. EFFECTS OF THE gtlt HOUSE
Combinations for fortunes, fortunate father, indigent
father, long livlng father, wealthy and famons father,
virtuous and devoted to father, fortuncs, inimical to
fathcr, bcgged food, combinations for father's death'
fortunatp periods, lack of fortunes.
21. EFFECTS OF THE IOth HOUSE
Paternal happiness, performing religious ncrificcs,
royal patronage, carnal pleasures' ornaments' ccssa'
tion of duties, learned, wealthy, lack of virtuous act!'
obstruciions to activities, combinatioas for fame.145
t52
160
169
173
178
6
22. EFFECTS OF THE TTth NOASE
Many gains, income in Nishkas, no gainc, wcelth
lhrough coborn.
23, EFFECTS OF THE 12 th HOUSB
Expenser on good &tount, beautiful houses and bcd,
, begctting a lpouse, planets in visiblc snd iavisiblo
halves, going to hcll, final omancipalion, wandcring
in the country, earning through sinful mcagurcs,
crpeaditure on religious grounds.
24. EFfF TS OF THE BEAYA LORDS
Effcetc ofthe 12 bhava iords in various houses (total
144 comblnations), clues to sort out mutually c{ntra.
dictory cfrects.
25, EFFECTS OF NON-LUMINOAS PI,ANETS
Dhuma in lnrioue houses, Vyatipala la' various
houscs, Paridhi in various houses, Chapa in varioup
houses, Dhwaja in various houses, Gulika ln various
house, Pranapada's pooitlonal .e$ects with
rcfercncc to natal agcendant.
26, EVALTJATION OF PLANETARY ASPECTS
Plrnetary aspocts, aspectlnl cvaluationt, Special rulos
.for aspects of Seturn, Mars and Jupltor.
21. aI'ALVATION OF rTRENGIFHS
Sthaana bala, Sapthavargajabala, Ojhayugmarasi-
lmsabola, Kendradrbah, Drekkana bala, Digbalr,
Kaalabah, Paksha bala, Tribhagabah, Varsba-Masa-
Dina-Ilora bqla, 'Naisargika hh, Ayena bata,
. Motional strenglh of Sun and Mooa, Drlgbale,
planetary wat, motional strength foi Man etc.,
Bhavabatas, S[adbala rcquirements, phpva effccts,
fiigiUitity to isue predictions.
28, ISHTA AND KASHTA BALAS
. Exaltatioa rays, Chesbta Rasmi, bencffcial eud nalefis183
r86
189
236
251
269
7
fays, benefic and malefic tcndencies, naturc of cfiects
due'to digbala etc., Saptavargaja bala and ishta
kashta, eftcts of a bhava.
29. BHAVAPADAS .292
Method of Pada calculations, special exceptions'
- Padas for planets, Pada and finance, Pada and
financial losses, Cainful sources, 7th house from Pada'
. General.
30. UPA PADA 303
Upapada calculatlon, effect of 2nd from Upa pada,
o,if.-fto. the 2nd of Upapada, about sons, obtain-
ment of many sons and many daughters, coborn from
Lagna Pada, other m&tters from Lagna pada'
31. ARGALA OR PLANETARY INTERYENTION 3II
rormation of Argala, Argala effects'
32. P LANETA RY KARAKATW'+g
Atmakaraka defined, importance of Atmakaraka,
other Karakas, Yogakarakas or mutual coworkers,
house signific{lnce.
33. EFFECTS OF KARAKAMSA
Karakamsa in various signs, effects of planets in
Karakamsa, Rahu-Sun in Karakamsa, 'Gulika in
Karakamsa, effects of aspects on Ketu in Karakamsa'
effects of 2nd from Kaiakamsa, 3rd from'Kara'
kamta, 4th from Karakamsa, 5th from Karakamsa'
6tt fro- Karakamsa, ?th from Karakamsa, Sth from
Karakamsa, 9th from Karakamsa, l0th from Kara-
kamsa, l lth from Karakamsa, l2th from Karakamsa'
planets in 5th from Karakamsa'
34. YOGA KARAKAS
Nature due to lordships of planets, natural benetior
and malefics, angular and trinal lordships, angular
lordship, Rahu and Ketu, Planets & Aties ascendant,316
327
iro
Taurus ascendant, Gemini ascendant, C.ancer asc€n-
dant, Leo ascendant, Virgo ascendant, Libra ascen-
daot, Scorpio ascendant, Sagittarius ascendant,
Capricorn ascendant, Aquarius ascendant, and Pisces
ascendant, General,
35. NABHASA YOGAS
Formation and effects of Rajju, Musala, Nala, Maala
Sarpa, Gada, Sakata, Vihaga, Sringataka, Hala,
Vajra, Yava, Kamala, Vapi, Yupa, Sara, Sakthi,
Danda, Nauka, Koota, Chatra, Chapa, Chakra,
. Samudra, Gola" Yuga, Soola, Kedara, Pasa, Dama
.nd Veena Yogas.
36, MANY OTHER YOGAS
Subha, Asubha, Gajakesari, Amala, Parvatha, Kahala,
Chamara, Sankha, Bheri, Mridanga, Srinatha,
Sarada, Matsya, Koorma, Khadga, Lakshmi,
Kusuma, Kalanidhi, Kalpadruma, Trimurthi, and
Iagnadhi Yogas.
37. LANARYOGAS
Adhiyoga from the Moon, Dhana yoga, Sunapha,
Ar.apba, Duradhura and Kemadruma yogas.
'8. SOLARYOGAS
Veii, Vosi and Ubhayachari Yogas, effects of these
Yogae.
39. RATAYOGAS
Kingly Yogas forming in various mann'ers.
&. YOGAS FOR ROYAL ASSOCIATION
41. YAGAS FOR WEALTH
Yogas for affluence, effects of angutar lord'sdivi-
sional dignitics, effects of 5th lord's divisional digni-
ties, efrccts of 9th lord's divisional dignities, angular3s7
366
384
386
387
399
402
I
and trinal lords relatod, effects of divisional dignities
of the two planets related.
42. COMBINATIONS FOR PENURY 413
43. LONGEVITY 416
Pindayu, rectifications, dcductions for planets in the
visible half, malefics in ascendant, ascendant's contri-
bution, Naisargayu, Amsayu, longevity for other
living beings, full life span of various living beings,
choice of longevity, doubtful cases clarified, other
clues to longevity, further clarifications, rectificatiohs,
special rules for Seturn and Jupiter, increase and fall
in class of longevity, Iimltless longevity, supernatural
longevity, living till the end of yuga, living the life :
span of a sage.
44. MARAKA ( KILLER) PLANETS 440
Marakas based on lordship, maraka dasa, star groups
related to death, Rrhu-Ketu as Marakas, 3rd house
and death, occupants of the 8th house, fate of the
corpse, serpent decanates, prenatal abode, ascent after
death,
45. AVASTHAS OF PLANETS 448
Infant state etc,, Awakening, dreaming and sleeping
states, Deepta and other 8 ptates, Lajjitadi avasthas,
calculation of Sayana and other I I Avasthas, effects
of Cheshta ete. effects of Sayanadi Avasthas for
planets from the Sun to Ketu.
ERRATA 483
Preface
Presented herewith with pleasure is the first-ever English
translation of the full text of the available version of Maharshi
parasara's Brihat Parasara Hora.sastra. But for the blessings
of Lor<i Ganesa this would have been as uphill task forme'
Sri Maha Vishnu is the god f gods. So is ParasaraHora-
the book of books in the field of astrology.
The work is in the form of a carritch between sage Paraqara
and his disciple Maitreya who later himself became a worthy
sage. Parasara belonging to Vasishta's lineage was Veda Vyara's
faitrer. As coulcl be seelr in the course of progressing th-orugh
li. t.*,, sage Saunaka was the preccptor of Parasara in the
lnatter of aitrotogy. Saunaka was one of the earliest sages and
was Garga's disciPle.
Thi date of parasara could be attributed to be roughly the
efa of Dharma Raja of Maha Bharata' This can be understood
when the sage states "in the present Yuga, Dharma Raja is born
with the combination of..." He further states that Salivahana
;*itr u, born with the same combination...' Further, the reader
could find statements relating to the horoscopic yogas of Maha
Vitttou, Prajapati, Swayambhu Manu etc' which statement
could possibly be made by no ordinary- mortal'
Varaha- Mihira in Brihat Samhita, Kalyana Varma tn
Saravali and many such other illustrious authors gave references
df ?arasara's astrological statements'
Parasara Hora finds its translation ih Bengali, Malayalam
etc. which translations however have not been soen by me' I
have with me the following versions'
1. Sri Venkateswata Press, Bombay, partly rendered in Hindi'
For a msjority of slokas, one can find Sanskrit commen'
tary only.
rl
2. Hindi translation by Suaram Jha. (Master Khelari Lal,
Varanasi edition)
3. Hindi transtation by Devachandra Jha (Chaukambha
edi.tion)
4. Hindi transhfion by Ganesa Datta Pathak (Thakur prasad
edition)
Afterrcrutinizing critically the .four manuscripts, I .have
for ieasona of more credibility chosen the Sanskrit version
rendered by Sitararm Jha. Thc Chaukambha version is almost
the same as that of Khelari Lal's.
Othcr versions that I have come across are :
l. Tamil translation by C. G. Rajan-for only 36 cbapters,
without Sanskrit I'erses.
2. English translation by N. N..K. Rao for only 25 chapters,
witbout Sanskrit slokas.
Thus, I have felt a neid to make the original version
avallable in English to the fullest possible extent. Our version
has 97 cbapters containing English translation and exhaustive
alnotations and exanrples.
To handle the publication easily, we have divided the work
in two volumes. The present volume-first volume-contains 45
cbapters while the remaining 52 chapters have been put in thesecond volume.
Chapter I and chapter 2 give some . preliminary extra-
astrological information. From chapter 3, tho astiological
information begins. , In tbis chapter, phnetary descriptions,
benefics aod malefics, planetary deities, complexions, s"*,primordial compounds, seasons, relationships, dignities etc. urigiven. Methods of calcurating the'5 upagrahas rike Dhoomaand Muburta velas like Gulika are given. These are totally tenand have thcir own say on a nativity, as the other nine LainGrabas have. so to say, these upagrahas and Muhurta vela5can alter in suitebh proportions the effects duc to Nava crauai
l2
In tho matter of calculation of Gullka, a different concept comes
to light from this oldest work. The latcr authors have given an
altogether variable in knowing Gulika's position whereas
Perasara advised that it should be cast for the beginnin! of
Saturn's Muhurta. Whoreas some suggest that it should be for
the ending Muhurta of Saturn.
In chapter 4, each Rasi is described from various angles.
Slokas 25-30 are the climax of this chapter. An unerring
method to find out the Nisheka Lagna (or the moment of
intercourse causing conception) from the time ofl birth is outlined.
Though the prooess of calculation is as simple as a school
student's mathematical quiz, it has great truth in it which even
modern science could not discover. To provo the truth of the
statement in the sago's instruction, a practicai example has been
given by me. An assumed exanrple cannot better solve the
probfem. A practical case where the time of coitus is astrologi-
call;r chosen is taken in hand; time of birth has also been got
accurately notod. From the tinro of birth, the time of Nisheka
(or of coitus) is traced which is not in variation, even to the
slightest extont, with the originally noted Nisheka time. Again
from the time of Nisheka, the birth time is traced in a forward
manner using only traditional rules of astrology. This exercise
proves three important points, viz.
l. The point of M.C. is to bc found out in the mtal horos-
cope aod houses intersected accordingly. This is popularly
called Sripati Paddhati. Originally Parasara qdvocated this
system.
2. Gulika's position should be found out for the bcginning of
Saturn'g Muhurta only.
3. Lahiri's Ayanamsa is the first best. The reader will find
that we have used Moon's exsct longitude in the abovc
prqcess. Simple angular distance by any Ayanamsa will
not elter the solution, but a slight change in Moon's
. poeition will take us fer away from the truth. With lahiri's
.Ayanamsa, we can safely work out even Nadiamsas, which
ohange fast,
l3
The method given by me in working out the future birth
time from the time of coition can very well help the astrologers
to foretell the exact moment of birth from the time of query.
Reseaches reveal that time of query has a perfect alignment with
the time of Nisheka.
Chapter 5 toucht-is various special lagnas, tike Ghatika
Lagna, Hora Lagna and Bhava Lagna. The importance of these
ascendanss cannot be . underestimated. A final Bhava chart can
emerge after merging the different bhava charts caused by these
various special ascendants. This final bhava chart can only
reveal the extent of planetary effects when considered housew.se
whereas the bhava chart exclusively prepared on natal ascendant
alone can sometimes mislead. This is what the sage emphasises
ln sloka 9.
Cqme to chapter 6. The zodiac is divided in to sixteen
Vargas or divisions. These are called Shodasa Vargas. How to
find out such Vargas and thcir use are fully explained. These
are from Rasi down to Shashtiamsa. In the classification, the
vargas are made in four groups' i.e. 6 vargas, T Vargas, 10 Vargas
and 16 Vargas and special technical names have beon given for
the total number of desirable vargas a planet attained for easy
identification. For example if a planet is said to be in Golo'
kamsa, it indicates that out of 16 Vargas, it is in l5 good V:rrgas.
These technical names appear in the gradation of Raja Yogas.
Each Varga finds a certain specific use in preferenco to a
planet's Rasi position. For example, without considering the
Dvadasamsa chart no tangible resuits due to the native's parents
can be known. In deciding one's career, the Dasamsa positions
of the planets are of supreme importance. These are highlighted
in chapter 7. In this very chapter the sage enunciates what is
called Vimsopaka strength of a planet. He assigns a maximum
. of 20 points taking again differently the four Varga classifications,
. viz. Shadvarga, Sapta Varga, Dasa Varga and Shodasa Varga.
The consideration here is whether a planet is placed in own sign,
, friendly sign, encmy's sign and the like in the concerncd Varga
scheme. Ihen an eveluaton is done to get Vimsopaka strength.
This strength enables us decide the extent of auspicious effects a
planet will be capable of revealing in'a dasa.
l4
Chapter 8 deals with what is called Jaimini aspects on Rasi
basis. Maharshi Jaimini was the sage who expanded these
Parasari principles very extonsively in Sutra form for easy
nemorization and successful applicability. The original concept
is however from the pen of Parasara.
Childhood evils are discussed in chapter 9 whiie chapter 10
prescribes planetary combinations to combat zuch possible evils.
Basic information about the 12 houses could be f<rund in
chapter I I while specific attention may be given to slokas 14-16.
Thesc 3 slokas serve an important key in knowing how a Bhava
is going to give effects under various circumstances.
Chapters 12-23 give a variety of information and instruc-
tions in analysing the 12 houses of a horoscope in a systematic
manner. A closo study of these rules will tame one's mind to
scientiflcally approach the horoscope for fruitful resuts.
Chapter'24 is again one of the most important chapters.
Here, the various effects of a Bhava lord being in a specific house
are given. All tho 12 lords are fully covered. How to Eort out
a situation in case of contrary indications is given in slokas
145-148.
The bhava effects of Dhooma, Vyatipata, Gulika ctc.. are
narrated fully in chapter 2.5. Pranapada Lagna's position vis-a-
vis natal ascendant also reveals certain special effects as could be
seen in this very chapter.
Shadbala calculations, Ishta and Kashta phalas and other
related mathematical aspects are elaborately laid down in the 3
chapters, viz. 26,27 and 28.
It is not in order if planets arp studied with reference to
mere natal chart. Padas for various houses will furfher alter the
planetary sffects. This is what is taugbt in chapter 29. Raja
Yogas, inter alia are best analysed through Arudha chart or Pada
chart. The sage suggests Graha Padas as well, but u0fortuna-
tely he leaves it at that without adding much information.'
For still deeper research, Upapada will be more effective.
This area will give moie clues particularly about marriage, financo
and.diseases. See chapter 30.
Chapter 3l entitled'Argaladhyaya' though brief has worthy
information on planetary interventions, obstructions and effects
thereo).
t5
Significance of planets is treated in chapter 32.
Karakamsa is the Navamsa Rasi occupied by Atma
Karaka. Plenets forming a certain relationship with Karakamsa
and their effects are narrated in chapter 33 extending to 99
slokas.
Chapter 34 is again one of the most instructive. Planets
.assume a certain tendency by virtue of owning a certain house.
The sage elaborately touches such roles for various planets for
all the 12 ascendants. He decides on such principles the Yoga
Karakas, Voga Bhanga, Karakas and Marakas for each ascendant'
This will enable us undentand whelher planet will give bene'
ficial resutts or adverse effects. Death dealing planets or Mrakas
allow us to guess the period of one's death,' 
.d,s the name implies, chapter 35 lists Nabhasa Yogas which
are available ln most stlndard texts. Many new Raja Yogas
could be found in chapter 36, like Khadga, Mridanga, Chamara,
Kahala etc.
Chapters !7 and 38 deal with Lunar and Solar yogas which
are 