Copyright Disclaimer

All rights reserved, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, distributed or transmitted in any form or
by any means, including photocopying, recording or
other electronic or mechanical methods, without the
prior written permission of the publisher.
For permission request, write email here astrolight8@gmail.com

 Table of Contents
(Vivaha Prasna)
Putting the inquiry - 2
With regards to the young lady's folks - 4
Probability of marriage - 9
Passing of the couple - 12
Characteristic signs -

14

Revolting looking spouse - 20
Part XVIII (Santhana Prasna)
Foundations for nonappearance of issues - 25
Reception - 28
Loss of kids - 29
Birth of kids - 30
Infertility in lady - 37
Garbha prasna - 45
Torment to guardians - 46
Finding out a lady's pregnancy -

57

Unnatural birth cycle - 59
Sex of the kid - 60
Season of conveyance - 67
Therapeutic measures - 76
Santhana thithi - 84
How Adoption is denied - 92
Section XIX (Issues According to Birth Horoscope)
Mixes for offspring -

95

Bija and kshetra sphutas - 96
Demise of kids - 102
Family elimination - 103
Childlessness - 105
Father's demise before child's introduction to the world - 111
Reception - 113
Number of issues - 122
Planetary beams - 125

 At the point when kids are conceived - 129
Seventh House Through Horoscope
Variables to be thought of - 134
Yogas for spouse's passing - 135
Character of spouse -

136

Job of Venus - 137
Number of spouses -

142

Birth star of spouse -

146

Time of marriage - 150
Marriage Compatibility
Rasi arrangement - 153
Various perspectives - 154
Sexual similarity - 155
Planetary kinships -

158

Different kootas - 159
Gotra vichara - 165
Vihanganukoolya - 166
Bhootanukulya - 169
Ashtakavarga arrangement - 171
Mental similarity - 172
Significant things of concordance - 175
Effects of Transits
Travel of the Sun - 177
The Moon's travels -

178

Travel of Mars - 179
Travel of Mercury - 180
Travel of Jupiter - 180
Travel of Venus - 182
Travel of Saturn - 183
Appeasement of planets - 184
Vedha and Vipareeta Vedha - 186
Vedhya signs - 189
Diseases: Causes and Remedies
Cures according to Karma Vipaka - 192
Utilization - 192
Infection -

193

 Serpis - 194
Leucoderma - 194
Loose bowels - 194
Heaps - 195
Sicknesses of the eye - 195
Ear absconds - 195
Lingual sicknesses - 195
Stiffness -

196

Colic inconvenience -

196

Spleen sicknesses - 196
Female sicknesses - 197
Dropsy -

197

Urinary inconveniences - 197
Fistula - 198
Throat infections - 198
Migraine -

199

Epilepsy -

199

Imbecility and craziness - 199
Fevers - 199
Thirst - 199
Ulcers - 200
Dyspepsia - 200
Inside inconveniences - 201
Endowment of wellbeing - 202
Deities, Rulers and so on
Establishment of the heavenly Idol - 203
Divine presence - 204
Weakening of heavenly presence - 205
Deva Prasna - 206
Contrasting perspectives - 207
Fierceness of the Deity - 212
Questions bearing on rulers - 213
Planets and portfolios - 216
Inquiries on war and intrusion Characteristic signs -

219

Attack of the nation -

220

218

 Retreat of the foe - 221
Season of attack - 224
Harmony between parties - 226
Rout and triumph - 228
When to announce war - 230
Malicious signs - 231
Ruin of the ruler - 234
When to move the military - 235
Parigha -

240

Impacts of work days on movement - 243
Venture by water - 244
Exhortation to rulers - 252
Hunting -

257

Grouping of creatures - 258
Rainfall
Blends for weighty precipitation - 260
Appearance of fake Sun - 262
When downpours happen ? - 263
Meaning of lunar month Ashadha - 276
Venus and precipitation - 278
Mandalas or cycles -

278

States of mists and precipitation - 280
Creature Prognosticates - 280
Other supportive clues for anticipating precipitation Significance of Solar entrance -

284

Karanas and precipitation - 286
Noting inquiries on precipitation - 290
Anticipating floods -

292

Antagonistic breezes - 294
Koopa Prasna
Hints for finding water layers - 295
Demonstrative signs - 296
Lack of water - 297
Gupti chakra - 298
Presence of lowered wells - 303
Taste of the water -

305

283

 Vastu Purusha - 306
Hints from plants - 306
Profundity of the water layer - 307
Bhojana Prasna
Menu at dinners - 310
Sort of beverages served - 312
Nature of food - 313
Discussion at dinners - 314
Planets and tastes -

315

Nature of food ate -

316

The eating corridor -

319

Get back of an explorer - 320
Suratha Prasna
On co-home - 323
Depiction of the accomplice - 325
Nature of closeness -

329

Spot of co-home - 330
Nashta Prasna
Uncovering the idea of inquiry -

335

Questions connecting with missing articles - 336
Insights regarding burglary and the cheat - 336
The area of the article - 337
Planetary signs of robbery - 339
Number of people included - 342
Nature of the missing article - 343
Sign connotations - 347
Planets connoting the criminal -

349

The hoodlum's appearance and so on - 351
Recuperation of the article - 357
Nashta Jataka
Birth star from Prasna graph - 358
Nimittas and the Moon's situation upon entering the world - 362
Month of birth - 366
Rising sign upon entering the world - 370
Jupiter upon entering the world - 371
Dreams

 Tracking down the idea of a fantasy - 374
Consequences of dreams - 376
Various types of dreams - 379
Reasons for dreams -

380

Season of encountering the impacts of dreams - 381
Bharata's fantasy - 382
Benefic specks contributed via planets - 385
Adhama, Madhyama and Sobhana - 388
Planets traveling their Ashtakavarga signs The Sun's Ashtakavarga - 394
The Moon's Ashtakavarga - 395
Mars Ashtakavarga -

396

Mercury's Ashtakavarga - 397
Jupiter's Ashtakavarga - 400
Venus Ashtakavarga -

400

Saturn's Ashtakavarga - 401
Samudaya Ashtakavarga - 402
Greatest and least focuses - 402
Bhanduka, Sevaka, Poshaka and Grutaka - 404
To begin with, second and third pieces of life - 405
Ashtakavarga and Dasa results -

408

Trikona sodhana - 409
Ekadhipatya sodhana - 410
Zodiacal and planetary variables - 411
Father's demise - 412
Mother's demise - 413
Demise of siblings - 413
Number of kids - 414
Timing the introduction of issue - 416
More than one spouse - 420
Time of Marriage - 421
Passing of the individual - 422
Rundown of the Book - 423
End - 426
Unique Sanskrit Text -

439

388

 Vivaha Prasna (Marriage)
Verse 1. I will presently manage the subject of marriage in the wake of portraying matters
associated with life span. This is the request to be followed.
NOTES
In the initial segment of this book the various strategies for assessing life span have been
itemized. The creator presently takes up the topic of marriage and manages it comprehensively.

 Verse 2. A stargazer should initially look at the life spans of the couple to be hitched in light of
their individual horoscopes. Then, at that point, different subtleties of their future life like
youngsters, and so forth, ought to be all around considered. Solely after this, Vivaha Prasna can
be taken up. In the wake of fulfilling himself that there is amazing arrangement, he can suggest
the marriage partnership which is essentially made for descendants which alone fulfills the Pitris.
This is the perspective on Prasna Sangraha.
NOTES
It was the conviction among the people of yore that the fundamental object of marriage was to
sire kids, so the spirits of the withdrew could find happiness in the hereafter. Obviously current
thoughts are unique, yet the introduction of kids is a significant part of marriage.
Refrain 3. Marriage agreements can be affected solely after a cautious assessment of several's
lives as perused from a Vivaha Prasna. So say Brihaspati and Madhava in his Madhaveeya.
NOTES
The horary graph should frame the reason for an exhaustive comprehension of the possible signs
in the existences of the lady of the hour and the spouse. Then, at that point, alone comes the topic
of concurring endorsement or dissatisfaction for the match.
Madhaveeyam is a significant composition for the most part managing Muhurtha or electional
crystal gazing. The treatment of the 'marriage' issue has been very thorough. The book can be of
colossal commonsense interest to all understudies of crystal gazing. It is accessible just in
Sanskrit. It handles intense issues in Muhurtha, for example, the general significance of tithi
(lunar day), nakshatra (heavenly body), and so forth, and how, under unique planetary designs,
certain imperfections can be disregarded.
Vidya Madhaveeyam has an analysis by Vishnu, child of the writer, and including the editorial,
the book contains around fifteen thousand granthas. The creator Madhava is said to have lived
around 600 years prior under the support of the Vijayanagar King Bukka.
Verse 4. The querist should initially move toward the celestial prophet with love and afterward
articulate delicately without reiteration the names and asterisms of the expected lady of the hour
and spouse.
Verse 5. The celestial prophet should then look at the fate of the couple based on the Prasna
graph. The presence of benefics in the seventh house is great.
NOTES
It is to be noticed that no planets ought to possess the seventh house at the hour of marriage
while benefics in the seventh are signs of good in a horary outline bearing on marriage.
Verse 6. Assume a man wishes to make a question in regards to marriage. The right method is to
be accordingly:
Refrain 7. "Can this young lady (name and nakshatra to be given) desire to be prosperous with
pleasing and long marital relations and youngsters, assuming she is burdened to this individual
(name and nakshatra added) ?" This is the structure wherein the question is to be dressed.

 Refrain 8. Sage Brihaspati is of the assessment that the names and asterisms of both lady and
spouse ought to be expressed. Of these, the more significant is that of the lady. A cautious
perusing of Lagna uncovers the existence of the lady, while that of the seventh house gives
insights concerning the spouse.
Refrain 9. Thusly, the disposition, life history, and so forth, of the lady can be perceived from
the ascendant and the narrative of the husband can be had from the seventh.
Refrain 10. Assuming the Sun is incapacitated or possesses an antagonistic sign and doesn't
perspective either the ascendant or Arudha Lagna the lady will have no dad. Moreover she is
motherless assuming the Moon is correspondingly arranged.
NOTES
Here the strength of the Sun is to be noted. In the event that he is solid and doesn't angle the
ascendant, the young lady's dad doesn't care for her. Both Arudha and Lagna ought to be without
his perspective. In this manner one can discover the condition of the siblings from Mars; of the
uncles from Mercury, and so on The creator has given the above subtleties as expressed in the
Anushtana Paddhati.
Refrain 11. Assuming the seventh house from the Lagna or Arudha isn't aspected by the Sun,
who ought to be crippled or involve an unfriendly house, the dad of the groom won't be alive.
The Moon correspondingly positioned shows the mother won't be alive. Likewise the condition
of the siblings can be perused from Mars, and so forth.

NOTES

Allow us to take a delineation (Chart 1) where the proposed match is brought to a crystal gazer at
12 I.S.T. on 3-7-1982 at 13° N, 77° E 35. The graph for the inquiry time would be as per the
following:

The creator says the Lagna or Arudha should be considered. How not entirely set in stone? This
ought to, rigorously, not entirely set in stone as per the strategy illustrated in Chapter 2, Stanzas 7
to 11 (Part 1) which we will restate momentarily here.

"Arudha is a vital element in Prasna or Horary Astrology..." The 12 signs are alloted to the 8
bearings and as indicated by the course which the querent faces at the hour of interview, the not
set in stone.
In present day times, there is an appearing hitch in this technique. The present-day stargazer has
his furnishings, especially his composing work area, organized in a specific way, which
continues as before without fail.

 Normally any querent on any day should confront the stargazer in a similar bearing. This implies
the sign addressed by this bearing is generally the Arudha, regardless of who the querent, and at
whatever point that be. Obviously regardless of it, the technique is very viable on the grounds
that the places of the planets comparative with the Arudha keep ceaselessly evolving. Just
exploring different avenues regarding countless inquiries can affirm the technique.

Another strategy recommended appears to be more possible in that a circle is drawn and
separated into 8 sections where every cardinal point gets 45°.

The normal signs each get 45° while different signs get just 22 1/2°. The querent is approached
to put a piece of gold on any point which is known as the Arudha. For example in outline 1, if
the querent places the coin among east and south-east, Arudha would be Taurus. As indicated by
the principal strategy the course he faces would be the Arudha. In the event that he stands
confronting the north-east, Arudha would be Pisces. Regardless of whether the soothsayer has
his work area confronting the south-east and a seat inverse for the querent the Arudha being a
similar northwest sign Sagittarius each time, it would in any case work for all querents
accurately.
Rather than a gold coin (the gold addressing the Sun, the, center point of our planetary group), a
gold item like a ring, sleeve button, chain, bangle, pendant would be very all together in present
times.
Returning to Chart 1, the Lagna being Virgo, the Sun is in the tenth with Rahu. Arudha, as the
querent was Facing north-west, turns out to be Sagittarius. The Sun is aspecting Arudha however
he isn't in a hostile or incapacitated sign. Then again he is aspected by Jupiter three way showing
the young lady's dad is alive.
The Moon is crippled and doesn't viewpoint the Ascendant or the Arudha. Sadly the young lady
lost her mom a few years back. The fourth is adequately burdened, regardless of whether the
Venus-Mercury mix perspectives the Moon.
The Lagna has two malefics in it. The Lagna and the seventh masters are unfavorably positioned
in regard of one another. The Moon is in an Apoklima (the third, sixth, ninth or twelfth),
however doesn't have any significant bearing gainfully to Jupiter or Mercury. This shows it is
improbable the marriage will happen and regardless of whether it ought to, for the wellbeing of
contention, the couple might squabble unendingly.
In genuine practice, it is observed that regardless of whether there is this mix, the part of Jupiter
can invalidate the abhorrent impacts.

 Verse 12. Anything that has been definite before ought to be painstakingly thought of. What's
more assuming that they are observed ideal, the individual will be honored with a favorable luck,
youngsters and marriage. Any other way the outcomes will be negative.

NOTES
The creator recommends that in concentrating on the Prasna Chart, due thought should be given
to hints proposed in before sections. The creator has likely in view Chapter II wherein certain
signs bearing on Time, Space, and so on, have been managed. On the off chance that the signs
are additionally great, marriage happens and one will appreciate satisfaction and abundance.
Verse 13. Certain 'Nimittas' have been given in Chapter 2 and they are uncommonly helpful in

 questions bearing on marriage. They can be skilfully used in this unique circumstance.
Refrain 14. From the first piece of the sloka "Kujendu", impediments, and so forth, about the
menses and marriage ought to be learned. From the second part ought to be gathered the chance
of marriage, and so on

NOTES

Varaha Mihira has given insights regarding the menses in ladies in his Brihat Jataka, Chapter 4
start with the refrains 'Kujendu hetu prathi maasa maarthavam...' In the initial segment of the
sloka, how wedding functions are deterred and in the second part, certain signs that achieve
blissful relationships are given. In Vivaha Muhurtha, if Mars aspected by the Moon involves the
third, sixth, tenth and eleventh, marriage should be deferred or halted as a result of the month to
month menses (feminine progression) of the lady. On the off chance that he possesses even signs
from the ascendant as the second, fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth and twelfth, marriage won't occur
for a similar explanation. If the Moon aspected by Jupiter possesses the second, fourth, fifth,
seventh, ninth and twelfth (anupachaya rasis) marriage will occur with no accident. In a similar
way, assuming he possesses odd signs from Lagna as the third, fifth, seventh, ninth and eleventh
then additionally there will be no not kidding deterrent. If the Moon aspected by Mars travels the
second, fifth and sixth Bhavas, the month to month menses will occur.
At the point when the Moon aspected by Jupiter possesses other Bhavas, sexual joining among a
couple happens. In an inquiry bearing on the introduction of kids (to be itemized later) the month
to month time span can be fixed by noticing the yoga-sphuta of the Moon and Mars. Origination
can be determined based on the Yoga - athonyathastha; Chandra Sphuta can be shown up at from
premgrahasthitai. Upaithe kamani gives the hour of conveyance. Hence we see that this verse is
wealthy in significance and must be painstakingly applied in the specific situation. It is said that
this verse shows even specific therapeutic measures to be performed to achieve blissful
fulfillment of marriage as the love of Sita, Rama, Krishna, Rukmini, and so forth.

Verse 15. Marriage won't occur on the off chance that the tormented Moon involves an even sign
from the Prasna Lagna or Arudha and the inquiry is placed in the time of the melting away
Moon. The Moon in the eighth additionally demonstrates some deterrent for the marriage.

Takes note of The above mixes are as given in Prasna Sangraha.
Refrain 16. Assuming that the querist ends up contacting his arm, chest or head, marriage will
take place. On the off chance that he anyway contacts his feet, knees and knee-covers, the
marriage will be postponed. Assuming he contacts his left arm, his back, his rear midsection, the
marriage won't happen. Assuming the rulers of the ascendant and the seventh or the master of the
ascendant and Venus exchange houses, or involve well disposed places, or are commended, or
angle one another, marriage will occur.

 NOTES
Here Arudha and the master of the seventh from Arudha can likewise be considered for reasons
for expectations. It could be noticed that the pieces of the body to be contacted for good
outcomes are exceptionally the suggestive regions by and large utilized by youthful couples.
Those, not utilized, are precluded.
Verse 17. If malefics aspected by malefics are crippled or put in unfriendly signs in the eighth,
marriage won't happen for reasons unknown or the other. On the off chance that the malefics are
in the sixth, marriage doesn't happen as a result of infection to the couple. A similar attitude may
likewise be the reason for breakdown of marriage arrangements because of fights among family
members. If at the lime of inquiry, creatures, birds or snakes are found in the demonstration of
living together, then, at that point, the young lady's personality will be problematic.
NOTES
This verse empowers us to expect based on the inquiry time whether or not marriage exchanges
will be productive.
(a) For the disappointment of dealings because of some explanation or the other malefic planets
aspected by malefics should be in the eighth, crippled or in unfriendly signs, (b) Breakdown of
exchanges will be because of the sickness of the couple if the malefics alluded to in (a) are in the
sixth, dependent upon similar difficulties as referenced supra, (c) The demeanors referenced in
(b) may likewise show the disappointment of arrangements because of fights of family members,
(d) The young lady's personality will be problematic - the creator really utilizes the word jaarini
(adulteress) - if at the hour of question, creatures, birds or snakes are viewed as in fornication.
Here is a Prasna (Chart 2) which is clear as crystal. Model: 31-3-1983 at 6-30 p.m. (I.S.T.) at
Bangalore.

Here (Chart 2) the eighth house is involved by malefic Mars, however in own sign. Saturn
magnified viewpoints him. Whenever the inquiry was put whether the proposed coalition would
appear, it was demonstrated it would not be fruitful. Albeit the sixth house straightforwardly isn't
burdened according to (c), the sixth master Saturn retrograde and beset by Mars brought about
the guardians of the lady of the hour and lucky man quarreling over the gifts to be made by the
lady's party. The union severed on the grounds that the young lady's folks essentially couldn't
oblige the voracity of the kid's folks.

 Refrain 18. Both the spouse and the wife will bite the dust in the eighth year after marriage if the
Moon, conjoined with insidious planets, involves the eighth or sixth house from Lagna. In the
event that the Moon involves the sixth or eighth house and simultaneously assuming Mars
possesses the 6tb or eighth from the Moon, the spouse and the wife will pass on in the ninth year
of marriage with no issue. In the event that the Moon and Mars possess the seventh house,
demise of the couple will be in the seventh month after marriage.
NOTES
Passing of the couple will occur in the eighth year assuming the distressed Moon is in the sixth
or eighth either from Lagna or Arudha Lagna. The catastrophe happens in the ninth year, if
notwithstanding the mix recently referenced, Mars ends up involving the sixth or eighth from the
Moon. The couple will die in the seventh month assuming both the Moon and Mars are in the
seventh house. Here at whatever point Lagna is referenced, Arudha Lagna is likewise suggested.
Verse 19. If Yama Sukra (...) or the ruler of the tenth house from him involves the sixth, the
eighth or the twelfth from Arudha or on the other hand assuming that Venus possesses the sixth,
the eighth or the twelfth from Yama Sukra, marriage won't happen at the time fixed. Assuming
that Rahu or Ketu or Gulika possesses or angles the Yoga Sphuta shaped by adding the
longitudes of Yama Sukra, the ruler of Lagna, and Venus, the wedded couple won't have any joy
after marriage.

NOTES
The ascendant ascending at ghatis 22, 18, 14, 10, 6, 2 and 26 after dawn individually on Sunday
to Saturday gives the place of Yama Sukra. Yama Sukra is said to ascend at the times given
above on various non-weekend days.
The Yoga Sphuta alluded to in this verse is a point shown up at by adding the longitudes of
Yama Sukra, the ruler of the ascendant and Venus.
Assurance of Yama Sukra: Example: To decide Yama Sukra on 3-7-1982 at Bangalore at 12 Hrs.

 I.S.T. Work day - Saturday Sunrise - 5.55 a.m. L.M.T.
Yama Sukra ascends at 26 gh. after dawn on Saturday, i.e., at 10h. 24m. after dawn. Dawn +
10h. 24m. - 16h. 19m. Lagna at 16h. 19m. L.M.T. = 19° 51' Scorpio Therefore Yama Sukra 19°
51' Scorpio Lagna at 12h. I.S.T. = 13° 47' Virgo Longitude of Venus 17° 02' Taurus.
Yoga Sphuta = 229° 51' + 133° 47' + 37° 02' = 40° 40' or 10° 40' Taurus.
Applying this refrain to the model, Scorpio ought not be the sixth, eighth or twelfth from Arudha
for the union with happen. Here it is the twelfth from Arudha in Sagittarius.
The tenth master from Yama Sukra (Scorpio) who is the Sun ought to likewise not involve any
of the dusthanas from it. Here the Sun is in the eighth from Yama Sukra, again a variable against
the marriage occurring.
Rahu, Ketu or Gulika in Yoga Sphuta don't bring bliss in marriage. The Nodes don't beset it
however most of variables are against the marriage being blissful.
Refrain 20. Remarriage happens under the accompanying lakshanas: The presence of an
individual with two ladies at the hour of Prasna, unexpected appearance of a couple rather old,
sight of a bull and a cow at that point, the culmination of the Chakra Puja not by one but rather
by two people, sounds from a good ways; and presence of all creatures which enjoy wanton
association.
Verse 21. Marriage work gets blocked by the month to month time of the lady, if red blossoms,
or blood or scratching of the body with the fingers are seen at the hour of Prasna. The calls of
elephants and bison, sight of red blossoms and putting the gold-piece either in the middle
(padma) or in the lines in the chakra show disintegration of marriage.
Verse 22. Detachment of two people until now caught connected at the hip, seeing either a dead
body or a man passing on, and hearing expressions of question or fight demonstrates breakdown
of marriage. The following are given some lakshanas characteristic of cheerful associations.

NOTES
Refrains 20, 21 and 22 typify the lakshanas or demonstrative signs or signs which show that
relationships don't occur. The verses are clear and need not an obvious reason.
Refrain 23. In the event that at the hour of Prasna vendors turn up selling garments, or an
individual wearing unwashed garments and grasping a squandered fabric is seen; or any residing
being occupied with sexual association is seen, marriage will happen right away. Seeing a man
burrowing the ground or sawing wood, shows that the lady being referred to is a terrible one.
Verse 24. Assuming it is seen at the hour of Prasna that the dress of any individual is falling
away from his body, then, at that point, it tends to be gathered that the young lady isn't virtuous.
The equivalent can likewise be said assuming the negligible layer of the young lady falls from
her body.
Refrain 25. Marriage will happen soon assuming any of the accompanying signs are seen at the
hour of Prasna: (a) Merchants seem wishing to sell metallic vessels aside from metal pot; (b) a

 mirror made of metal or thumba bloom, or articles made of silver - these are seen at that point;
(c) an individual with consecrated string turns up perfectly after oil-shower; and (d) any
individual contacts his eyes with his own hands.
Verse 26. Early marriage is shown if at the hour of question two things interlaced or firmly
organized are seen; a few comes at that point or is seen a good ways off; an individual having
woolen strings round his hands and legs is seen; a vocalist turns up one or the other singing or in
any case; or any sweet-smelling salve as sandalwood is seen at that point.
NOTES
Refrains 20 to 26 arrangement solely with nimittas or characteristic signs or signs, based on
which one can foresee whether a proposed marriage happens or regardless of whether it will
separate. The posting of these nimittas is critical. What sharp onlookers were our antiquated
sages becomes apparent when we mirror that in nature nothing remains to possibility or mishap
and that synchronicity is the premise of occasions to occur. For instance seeing a couple catching
their hands shows achievement. In any case, the 'sign' as such may not impact the occasion.
However, an occasion and a connected sign can be simultaneous peculiarity as Carl Jung has
clarified.
Refrain 27. Assuming Venus and the ruler of the seventh house possess Upachayas, the couple
will be cheerful after marriage and conceive youngsters.
NOTES
A similar standard can be reached out to foresee about issues, and so on, hence: If Jupiter and the
ruler of the fifth involve Upachayas, there will be a lot of thriving after the introduction of a kid.
If Mars and the master of the third possess the third, the sixth or the eleventh, there will be joy
after the introduction of a sibling. Accordingly the Karaka and the different masters are to be
thought of. The above mixes are according to Prasna Ratna.

Refrain 28. Assuming the solid Moon and Venus possess even signs and Navamsas and
viewpoint Lagna, an individual will actually want to wed the young lady in view early.
NOTES
This blend is pertinent both to the birth and horary outlines.

Verse 29. On the off chance that the ascendant is in a female Drekkana and an even Navamsa
aspected by the Moon and Venus, marriage will occur soon.
Noticed This yoga can be helpfully applied to a male graph.
Verse 30. Benefics in kendras and trikonas and the seventh house, claimed and aspected by
benefics, get an excellent lady of the hour to the individual. Assuming that the seventh house is
claimed by a malefic, the spouse won't great look.
NOTES

 This Yoga likewise can be applied in perusing the seventh house in the horoscope of a male. The
above is from Prasna Sangraha.
Refrain 31. If the Moon aspected by benefics possesses the third, the sixth, the seventh, the tenth
or the eleventh from Lagna (or Arudha); or Venus and the Moon involve Lagna or the seventh,
the Lagna turning out to be Gemini or Virgo or Libra or Aquarius; or Mercury, Venus and
Jupiter possess quadrants or the seventh house, then, at that point, marriage happens early.
Refrain 32. If in a horary outline the ascendant, the fifth, the eighth and the ninth are related
with or aspected by their particular masters and are without malefic angles or affiliations then, at
that point, just kindness happen to the couple after marriage. If any other way, no insightful man
ought to have the marriage celebrated. Assuming the Lagna and the Moon are in benefic
Navamsas, kindness result. Assuming that they are in the Navamsas of malefics, passing might
happen.

NOTES
In the event that at the hour of inquiry the ascendant, the fifth, the seventh, the eighth and the
ninth houses are liberated from the hardship of insidious planets yet are related with or aspected
by their separate rulers or benefics, then, at that point, the wedded couple will be cheerful after
the marriage. If none of these are so arranged, marriage will bring just detestable. Thus it ought
not be suggested. On the off chance that the ascendant and the Moon possess the Navamsas of
benefics, kindness be the outcome. In the event that they, in any case, possess insidious
Navamsas, fiendish alone will occur.
The ascendant in Chart 1 has Mars and Saturn who additionally perspective the seventh. Mars
and Jupiter angle the eighth. The fifth isn't aspected by any planet while the ninth is related with
Mercury and Venus. The short focuses are more in proof.
In the Navamsa, Lagna is a benefic sign Taurus however the Moon is in a malefic sign. Further,
the Navamsa might be alluded to just when the Rasi is agreeable. Here since the Rasi graph itself
doesn't guarantee satisfaction, the Navamsa might be retired.
Verse 33. The wedded couple will bite the dust on the off chance that malefics are crippled or
are in threatening signs in the first, the seventh and the eighth.
NOTES
As indicated by Brihaspati, weakened malefics ought to possess the ascendant, the seventh or the
eighth; or these houses should be the threatening spots to the malefics in the Prasna graph. The
outcome is, the couple will bite the dust. The logical periods are the Dasas and Bhuktis of the
malefic planets alluded to above.
Verse 34. A malefic planet in weakness in the fifth house, aspected by unfriendly planets,
demonstrates that the lady is of sketchy person or her youngsters will bite the dust.
NOTES
In the event that the fifth is burdened by the presence of an incapacitated planet or the part of an

 antagonistic planet, the spouse is supposed to be unchaste or her kids will pass on. The creator
has all the earmarks of being fairly unclear. Which result - the lady becoming unchaste or her
kids kicking the bucket - will hold great ? The understanding is passed on to the knowledge of
the soothsayer. What we feel is, assuming the fifth house is beset according to the refrain, yet
Venus is perfect and all around arranged, no reflection can be projected on the personality of the
lady. One should be extremely cautious in issues of passing judgment on the virtue or in any case
of a lady.
Refrain 35. Assuming the fifth house is beset by malefic planets, the lady won't bear any kids. In
the event that at all kids are conceived, they will bite the dust. If these malefics are incapacitated
or in hostile signs, the mother will murder her kids.
NOTES
A mother to kill her youngsters should for sure be unfeeling and savage. There are obviously a
few moms who kill their kids for different reasons. Destitution might be one reason. Also
sketchy person - the mother having extra conjugal relations - may make the mother resort to the
wrongdoing of child murder. A similar mix is relied upon to bring about either the demise of kids
or the killing of the youngsters by the mother. To pass judgment on the last wrongdoing the
Moon's burden and any blend for infidelity ought to be painstakingly distinguished.

The over two verses are from Anushtana Paddhati.
Verse 36. On the off chance that the master of the seventh house is solid, the querist will wed in
a decent and rich family. In the event that the ruler of the seventh is frail or involves a weakness
sign or a disagreeable house, he will wed a revolting looking spouse from a poor and awful
family.
NOTES
As indicated by this refrain we can say that the individual gets a delightful and great spouse and
likely attractive gifts additionally if the master of the seventh is very much positioned and solid:
if not the wife won't be gorgeous, she hails from an awful family and can't want to get any
material advantages. In nowadays when acknowledgment of settlement is unlawful, visionary

 translation ought to be skilfully finished.
Refrain 37. Assuming the female planets are in a well disposed sign aspecting Lagna which
should be a male sign, the spouse will adore the husband. If not the outcome will be opposite.

NOTES
This verse alludes to 'stree-graha' or female planets and they are the Moon and Venus. They
ought to possess agreeable signs and perspective the ascendant which ought to turn out to be a
manly sign. At the point when this mix happens, the spouse gets a caring wife. Here even one
female planet (Venus or the Moon) can cause the yoga. Assume Sagittarius is the ascendant and
Venus viewpoints it from Gemini, a cordial sign. The spouse gets a caring wife. Applying this to
a male horoscope, if a male planet (Sun, Mars or Jupiter) is in an amicable sign and perspectives
the Lagna which should be an even sign, the spouse will adore the wife.
All such blends ought to be skilfully and not in a real sense deciphered to come to address end
results.
Verse 38. The impacts of Trimsamsa are clarified in the part on the horoscopy of ladies by
Varahamihira. These likewise ought to be reasonably applied to Prasna diagrams bearing on
marriage.
NOTES
Such significance has been given to Varahamihira's Brihat Jataka by the creator of this work that
Mihira is frequently cited and alluded to with deference.
In the part on "Female Horoscopy", the incomparable Mihira has managed the meaning of
trimsamsas in the horoscopes of ladies, particularly in surveying their personality. This
equivalent subject has been managed thoroughly in the book Female Horoscopy by the late Prof.
B. Suryanarain Rao. A cautious perusing of this book is additionally suggested.
Verse 39. If at the hour of question a young lady of eligible age shows up, or an anecdote about
her is heard, the lady will be comparative in appearance, shape, direct, and so forth, as the young
lady seen or knew about. The spot of the lady can be known from the more grounded of the
rulers of Lagna and Arudha. In the event that the young lady's extreme Moon turns out to be
equivalent to the Arudha Lagna in the Prasna diagram, the couple will live lengthy and generate
youngsters.
NOTES
At the hour of Prasna, it might so happen that a young lady of eligible age is seen or the voice of
a young lady is heard. The lady of the hour will be comparable in shading, shape and direct to
the one you end up seeing or hear. The spot of the lady of the hour can be known from the
masters of Arudha and Lagna, whoever is more grounded. The young lady's Rasi or Moon-sign
should be that of Arudha. Assuming that such a young lady is chosen, the wedded couple will
live lengthy and cheerfully. They will have prosperous kids.
Refrain 40. The time, when marriage happens, is to be known accordingly: When the Moon

 travels the Moon's Dwadasamsa Rasi, or its fifth or the ninth or the Chandrabhilasha Rasi, or the
Navamsa Rasi of the ruler of the seventh.
NOTES

Whenever the Prasna outline demonstrates marriage, we can foresee that the marriage will
happen when the Moon travels
(a)

the sign connoted by his own Dwadasamsa position;

(b)

the fifth or ninth from it; or

(c) Chandrabhilasha sign - this is clarified in the following verse - or the
(d) Navamsa Rasi of the ruler of the seventh.
For instance let us accept that the Lagna is Sagittarius, and the Moon is 21° Taurus and Mercury
is 15° Gemini which implies the Moon involves Capricorn Dwadasamsa. Master of the seventh
Mercury is in Aquarius Navamsa. In the event that the Prasna graph shows marriage, it can occur
(a) when the Moon travels Capricorn; or (b) Taurus or Libra; or (c) Chandrabhilasha sign; or (d)
Aquarius. Here as expected the soothsayer's insight and instinct should assist him with
pinpointing which of these four choices holds great.
Verse 41. Partition the Moon's longitude (in minutes) by 800. Call the rest of). Increase (a) by 3.
Partition the item by 200-The remainder is the Chandrabhilasha sign. The rest of by 30 and
separated by 200 gives the degrees. Again increase (a) by
9. Partition the item by 200. The remainder addresses the Chandravela longitude.

NOTES
Chandrabhilasha sign and Chandravela sign are two unique variables. Model: Chart 3: 8-30 p.m.
on 24-5-1984 at Bangalore.
Moon = 332° 01' in Rasi.

 Whenever the Moon travels Pisces (Dwadasamsa) Rasi, or the fifth (Cancer) or the ninth
(Scorpio) from Pisces, marriage might occur. It can likewise happen when he travels Leo, the
sign involved by the seventh master Mercury in Navamsa. Assurance of Chandrabhilasha sign:
The Moon's longitude-332° 01' = 19921'
(I) 19921/800 = 24 and remaining portion 721 a = 721

(ii) a x 3 = 721 x 3 = 2163
(iii) 2163/200 = 10.815 = 10s 24'45 degrees.
(iv) Chandrabhilasha Sign - Aquarius 24.45 degrees. Assurance of Chandravela sign: (I) a x 9 =
721 x 9 = 6489 (ii) 6489/200 = 32.445 = 32s 66.75 degrees = 34s 6.75 degrees
Erasing products of 12, we get 10s 6.75 degrees Chandravela = Aquarius 6.75 degrees.
Refrain 42. In the wake of concentrating on the Prasna outline as such and taking note of
completely the propitious or ominous nature of Sakunas, assuming that the Muhurtha for the
wedding is chosen, all that will end well.

Sanihathi Prasna (Children)

Verse 1. I will depict in this part the question bearing on the introduction of youngsters.
All inquiries ought to be put at a favorable second.
NOTES
Since time has a significant impact in molding the course of activities, the creator recommends
that it is vital that questions are put at propitious minutes.
Verse 2. A woman living together with her better half at a propitious second will be honored
with youngsters soon. Generally great activities ought to be directed at propitious minutes.
Correspondingly all questions with respect to marriage, riches, living together, and so on, ought
to be made at a picked time when the ascendant and planets are helpfully arranged.
Refrain 3. An inquiry with respect to kids should be made accordingly: "will this individual
named.. furthermore brought into the world in the heavenly body of... get a child from this lady
named and brought into the world in the star grouping of "
Refrain 4. A santhathi Prasna (inquiry orientation of kids) is pertinent to both a couple. The
Lagna connotes matters relating to the spouse and Arudha Lagna uncovers everything about the
wife. This is the perspective on Prasna Sangraha.
Refrain 5. On the off chance that both the rulers of Arudha and the ninth from it are in burning,
there is an off-base thing in the 'belly' (kshetra) of the spouse; wherein case the man needs to
wed again for youngsters If both the rulers of the Lagna and the fifth from it are in ignition, there

 is some difficulty in the beeja (seed) of the husband, wherein case, love of Vishnu and Brahmins
ought to be depended on.
NOTES
Assuming it is found that kshetra and beeja are tormented, one can securely foresee that the
couple will have no youngsters. What is to be noted is that in a female horoscope, the ninth
house is the seat of youngsters, while in a male horoscope the fifth house oversees kids.
Verse 6. Whenever the Moon involves upachayas from Arudha and anupachaya from the
ascendant; when Arudha ends up falling in a female sign while Lagna turns out to be a male
Rasi; when Agni-bhuta ascends in the ascendant; and when the tree, administered by the
heavenly body involved by Jupiter, bears no natural products at the hour of Prasna, the forecast
can be given that it is challenging to have issues.
NOTES
The Prasna graph doesn't demonstrate the introduction of youngsters under the accompanying
blends:

(1) The Moon involves the third, the sixth, the tenth and the eleventh from Arudha Lagna and
the second, the fourth, the fifth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth and the twelfth from the
ascendant.
(2)

Arudha Lagna is a female sign and the Prasna Lagna is a manly sign.

(3)

Agnibhuta ascents in the ascendant.

(4) The tree managed by the group of stars involved by Jupiter isn't yielding organic product
at the hour of question.
The different Tatwas, like Agni, and so on, have been clarified in Chapter 14 of the initial
segment to which the peruser may allude for subtleties.
The above verse is from Santana Deepika.
Verse 7. The blends for childlessness, reception, passing of kids, birth of not many kids, and
having many issues, and so forth, are currently managed.
Verse 8. In the event that Jupiter, the master of Lagna and the rulers of the fifth and the seventh
are largely frail, the examiner will have no kids.
Refrain 9. Assuming malefics are in the fifth and the ruler of the fifth house is fixed in the
middle malefics and is without benefic perspective, then, at that point, childlessness will result.
NOTES
As indicated by one more form the ruler of the fifth is to be crippled (neecha samsthite): The
ninth from Arudha Lagna and the fifth from the ascendant are the places of issues.
Refrain 10. If malefics involve the fifth from the ascendant, the Moon and Jupiter, and they are
not aspected by benefics, anapatya yoga results.

 Refrain 11. Assuming a sign claimed by Mercury or Saturn turns out to be the fifth house and it
is aspected by or related with Saturn and Gulika, one should go in for reception.
Refrain 12. The local will have no regular issue except for should embrace one assuming that a
solid benefic planet possesses the fifth house without the angle from the master of the fifth
house.
Refrain 13. Assuming Pisces or Capricorn turning out to be the fifth house is involved by
Jupiter, the local experiences distress because of loss of kids. On the off chance that Cancer
turning out to be the fifth is involved by Jupiter, he will have various female kids, so say the
sages.

NOTES
Verses 5 to 13 rundown the mixes for birth of kids, demise of kids, childlessness (or anapat a
yoga) and reception. The verses are clear and need no further embodiment.
In refrain 5, there is a reference to Beeja and Kshetra. This subject has been comprehensively
managed in my book How To JUDGE A HOROSCOPE Volume I, to which the intrigued
peruser may allude. At the point when Beeja is distressed, the spouse, in spite of typical elements
of the generative framework, comes up short on unpretentious energy in the sperm to impregnate
the wife. At the point when the Kshetra is distressed, despite the fact that the spouse's belly, and
so on, might be typical she misses the mark on inconspicuous energy to consider. A cautious
investigation of Beeja and Kshetra hypothesis is extremely essential.
While there is the overall decree that Jupiter as karaka of kids, put in the place of kids,
annihilates the house, the creator seems to broaden the guideline further when he says, on the
power of antiquated sages, that Jupiter in the fifth indistinguishable with Capricorn or Pisces
causes one to experience the ill effects of distress because of death of kids. In the event that
Pisces is to be the fifth, the ascendant should be Scorpio.
Assuming Jupiter is in the fifth, his capacities as karaka and ruler become indistinguishable. He
will likewise viewpoint the Lagna. However the outcome is exceptionally horrible. Again when
one is brought into the world in Pisces and has Jupiter in the fifth (Cancer) he will have various
girls. By all accounts, this yoga could be thought of as unrealistic. However, the creator says it is
the assessment of the sages. These mixes should be adjusted in the illumination of other ideal or
ominous elements affecting the place of kids.
Verse 14. In the event that the weakened master of the fifth possesses the eighth which ought to
be an unfriendly sign without parts of benefics and the ruler of the eighth is in the fifth, there will
be loss of kids.
Refrain 15. Assuming Jupiter is fixed in the middle malefics and the fifth ruler is frail without
being aspected by or related with benefics, there will be loss of kids.
NOTES
In the above verses, the difficulty of the fifth master and Jupiter are considered for loss of

 youngsters. Similarly, assuming the fifth house is trimmed in the middle malefics and without
benefic perspectives and the fifth master is likewise dependent upon burdens, there will be loss
of youngsters.
Verse 16. As indicated by specialists in crystal gazing there will be loss of kids if the master of
the fifth is weakened, involves a hostile spot or is combust; or is related with the rulers of the
sixth, the eighth or the twelfth; or on the other hand if the master of the fifth possessing the fifth
is unaspected by benefics.
Verse 17. The local will have youngsters if the ruler of the fifth is solid, is in relationship with or
aspected by the master of the ascendant and the fifth house is liberated from burden.
Verse 18. There will be birth of youngsters assuming that Mars involves the fifth house which
should be Aries, Leo, Scorpio or Pisces and which should have the benefic part of Jupiter.

NOTES
The term utilized in the first is putravaaptim which customarily implies, a child will be
conceived.
Be that as it may, I have deciphered the term generously to suggest youngsters overall.
Refrain 19. Assuming that the fifth house is fixed in the middle and aspected by benefics or
conjoined with or aspected by the ruler of the fifth, birth of youngsters happens.

Refrain 20. Assuming the solid master of the fifth possesses any house other than the sixth, the
eighth or the twelfth and has the angle or combination of a benefic planet, 'birth of kids' can be
anticipated.
Refrain 21. If the solid master of the fifth possesses the ascendant, the fifth or the seventh and is
with practically no perspective or combination of malefics, there will be birth of issues.
Refrain 22. Assuming solid Jupiter involves the ascendant or the fifth or the seventh house and
is unaspected by malefics, youngsters will be conceived.
NOTES
Practically all the above verses accentuate the benefic demeanor of the ruler of the fifth, the fifth
notise and Jupiter to guarantee birth of youngsters, Jupiter can be viewed as solid in Pisces,
Cancer and Sagittarius. He gets digbala in the ascendant. In any case, in verse 21, the seventh
house is additionally referenced alongside the ascendant and the fifth house to guarantee birth of
descendants.
Verse 23. On the off chance that the master of the fifth invested with strength is between
benefics or aspected by benefics, birth of youngsters is shown.

Refrain 24. Antiquated preceptors assert that numerous kids will be conceived if Venus, Jupiter

 and Mercury and the ruler of the fifth conjoin or perspective the fifth house. The quantity of
youngsters relies upon the strength of the ruler of the fifth.
Verse 25. The learned say that many issues will be conceived, if the ruler of the fifth is in
worship, involves an odd Navamsa, is aspected by benefic planets, and the fifth house is
liberated from burden.
Refrain 26. Assuming that the ruler of the fifth, the Sun, Mars and Jupiter possess odd signs and
Navamsas, an enormous number of children will be conceived. If the master of the fifth is solid,
the children will be laid back.
NOTES
The Sun, Jupiter and Mars should almost certainly involve odd signs. In any case, their control of
the sixth, the eighth and the twelfth isn't alluring. Whenever the master of the fifth is solid one
generates a suputra or a child invested with the most desirable characteristics of friendship,
acquiescence and feeling of obligation towards his folks.
Verse 27. Assuming that the ruler of the fifth, the Moon and Venus join an even sign and an
even Navamsa, countless girls will be conceived.
Verse 28. On the off chance that Lagna turns out to be the Moon's Hora and the breath of the
stargazer courses through the left nostril; assuming Lagna is in the Sun's Hora and the breath
moves through the right side, then, at that point, there will be issues.
NOTES
In the event that the Lagna is in the Moon's Hora and the soothsayer at the time is breathing
through the left nostril, a little girl will be conceived. Assuming the ascendant falls in the Sun's
Hora and the breath moves through the right nostril, a child will be conceived.
We give the accompanying concentrates from one more form of the MSS.
Issues won't be conceived on the off chance that the ascendant is in Surya (Sun's) Hora, breath
goes through the right nostril and Arudha and Lagna are in odd signs.
The ascendant is in Chandra Hora. Breath goes through the right side. The Moon, Lagna and
Arudha are in Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio. There will be no issues.
The ascendant is in the Sun's Hora; the Moon, Lagna and Arudha involve Taurus, Leo, Virgo and
Scorpio. Agnibhuta ascends in the ascendant. No issues will be conceived. From certain
perspectives, the presence of Agnibhuta is fundamental for all the above yogas to cause the
outcomes ascribed to them. As indicated by some others, the presence of Agnibhuta alone
comprises a different yoga and keeps the birth from getting youngsters. As far as it matters for
us, we have not tried these yogas and henceforth we can't vouchsafe for their precision or in any
case: But the lessons of the bosses merit our consideration.
Refrain 29. If the master of the fifth involves the ascendant, the seventh or the fifth house; or the
rulers of the first and the seventh join the fifth house; or the ruler of the fifth or Jupiter joins the
ascendant; there will be birth of youngsters. In an inquiry bearing on youngsters Jupiter ought to
likewise be considered as master of kids.

 Refrain 30. The master of the ascendant and the fifth are related or they angle one another; or
they trade signs. This yoga gives issue to the local.
Verse 31. On the off chance that the Moon possesses Anupachaya Rasis from Arudha, kids will
be conceived. In the event that it is in the opposite, no issue will be the outcome The ascendant
oversees the spouse. The contrary view is communicated in his work on Muhurtha by Madhava.
NOTES
The interpretation of these slokas has not been done in a real sense. At the point when there is a
redundancy in the first it is by and large excluded. As per this sloka, the Moon's circumstance in
anupachaya signs (other than the third, the sixth, the tenth and the eleventh) from Arudha
prevents birth from getting kids, and that implies the Arudha rules the spouse and the ascendant
has administration on the husband. Madhava, the praised creator of the incredible work
Madhaveeya doesn't acknowledge this view.
Verse 32. Assuming the feminine stream occurs when the Moon aspected by Mars possesses
Anupachaya Rasis, the sexual association that happens after this will cause impregnation. If not
the sex will be fruitless of results. The ideal opportunity for productive sexual business is the day
when the Moon aspected by Jupiter involves Upachaya Rasis from the ascendant of the spouse.
Good times for impregnation are the Moola asterism and other muhurhas. Parva ought to be
stayed away from.
NOTES

The creator gives productive or prolific periods for impregnation. The feminine stream happens
when the Moon getting the part of Mars involves an anupachaya Rasi (the second, the fourth, the
fifth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth and the twelfth) from the place of the extreme Moon in
the spouse's horoscope. At the point when the sex congress happens after this, origination results.
If running against the norm the feminine stream happens when the Moon aspected by Mars is in
an upachaya place (the third, the sixth, the tenth or the eleventh) from the extreme Moon of the
spouse the sexual association won't bring about origination.
Sexual association whenever done on a day when the Moon aspected by Jupiter involves the
third, the sixth, the tenth or the eleventh from the extreme Moon of the spouse, or in the heavenly
body of Moola and asterisms pronounced to be really great for the principal taking care of the
youngster will bring about origination. For impregnating the spouse, the eighth lunar day, vishti,
riktha and athira karanas, sraddha (yearly service) days, and so on, ought to be kept away from.
Verse 33. Numerous techniques are utilized to decide the topic of the introduction of youngsters.
T will give under a technique I got from my preceptor.
Verse 34. The longitudes of the ascendant and Yamakantaka, accurately worked out, ought to be
added together. The general qualities of the subsequent Rasi and Navamsa ought to be noted and
the more grounded of the two ought to be considered for noting the inquiry with respect to
youngsters.

 NOTES
Model 1: Weekday - Saturday.
Dawn - 6.15 a.m. (Yamakantaka ascends at 18 ghatis after dawn on Saturdays). 18 ghatis = 18 x
24 mins. - 432 minutes = 7h 12m after dawn
Dawn + 7h 12m = 13h 27m.
The Lagna ascending at I3h 27m LMT gives the place of Yamakantaka on the day being referred
to.
Model 2:
Leave Lagna alone - 143° 20'
Leave Yamakantaka alone = 136° 15'.
Lagna + Yamakantaka = 279° 35' or Capricorn 9° 35' (Rasi) and Pisces (Navamsa). The more
grounded of Capricorn and Pisces is the Yogasphuta and ought to be considered for addressing
inquiries on youngsters.
Stazna 35. Assuming that this Yogasphuta turns out to be a Urdhwamukha, Urdhvodaya, or odd
sign and conjoined with or aspected by benefic planets, the introduction of a youngster happens
at an early date.
NOTES
Yogasphuta is the sign and Navamsa showed up at according to verse 34. Urdhwamukha signs
are additionally called Urdhvodaya or Sirodaya signs. They are Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra,
Scorpio and Aquarius. These signs, aside from Gemini, are strong during day.
In the event that, for instance, the Yogasphuta turns out to be Leo and benefics, for example,
Jupiter, Venus or very much related Mercury join or viewpoint it, then, at that point, we might
finish up the introduction of a kid will happen at a not past the point of no return date.
Refrain 36. Assuming that the Yogasphuta falls in Prishto-daya, Adhomukha and an even sign
conjoined with or aspected by malefics and unbiased planets, no youngsters will be conceived. If
anyway the sphuta falls in a male sign and male Navamsa, labor is demonstrated.
NOTES
Adhomukha signs referred to likewise as Prushtodaya signs are Aries, Taurus, Cancer,
Sagittarius and Capricorn. These alongside Gemini are strong during night.
Pisces frames a mix of both Urdhwamukha and Adhomukha and is called Ubhayodaya Rasi with
power both during constantly.
For instance, on the off chance that Yogasphuta falls in Taurus which is an Adhomukha sign and
furthermore even and planets, for example, badly related Mercury, the Sun, Saturn, Mars or
Rabu-Ketu impact it by perspective or occupation, no youngsters will be conceived. In any case,
if for example, Yogasphuta falls in Aries 15° 19', a Prishto-daya sign, so that its Navamsa is Leo,
the two signs being male and other important factors likewise good would demonstrate birth of a

 kid.

Refrain 37. The Yogasphuta got by adding the longitudes of Yamakantaka and Arudha Lagna
treated similarly as before demonstrates whether the lady is fruitless or can have kids.
NOTES
The Yogasphuta alluded to here is not the same as the Yogasphuta managed in verse 34. Be that
as it may, this Yogasphuta ought to be examined in a similar way as shown for verse 34 to
discover the infertility or in any case of the spouse.
Verse 38. Jupiter, the ruler of the fifth and Yamakantaka are related with or are aspected by
malefic planets and are without parts of benefics; they possess Anishta Bhavas in even signs and
in even Navamsas; the fifth house is distressed; Santhana Tithi ends up being after the eighth day
in obscurity half of the lunar month: If this large number of torments are available, we can guess
that no kid will be conceived. If anyway just a portion of these torments are found, kids will be
brought into the world after reasonable healing measures.
NOTES
Anishta Bhavas are the sixth, the eighth and the twelfth houses. The lunar day on which the
question is put is Santhana Tithi. On the off chance that every one of the variables are burdened
there will be no offspring. Assuming that some are burdened, therapeutic measures might be
turned to.

According to this refrain, factors inclining toward no birth of kids, are (a) Jupiter, the master of
the fifth and Yamakantaka ought to be distressed.

 (b)

They ought to involve the sixth, the eighth and the twelfth houses.

(c)

They should be in even signs and even Navamsas.

(d)

The fifth house ought to likewise be beset.

(e) The question ought to have been put after the eighth day of the dim portion of the lunar
month.
Assuming every one of the five variables acquire, there will be no birth of youngsters. If by some
stroke of good luck a few are available, then, at that point, one can have issues by performing
healing measures like gifts, love, and so on.

Refrain 39. If Jupiter, master of the fifth and Yamakantaka are not aspected by or related with
malefic or eunuch planets, and related with or aspected by benefics, and the fifth house falls in
an odd Rasi and an odd Navamsa; and on the off chance that Santhana Tithi ends up falling in
the splendid, half after the fifth lunar day, there will be birth of kids.
Verse 40. In the event that the master of the fifth from Lagna Dwadasamsa Rasi, possesses the
Lagna, a kid will be brought into the world soon. The youngster will be brought into the world in
however many years as is connoted by the quantity of the house the said master is in, from the
Lagna. Assuming that he possesses the sixth, the eighth or the twelfth, no youngster will be
conceived.
NOTES
In this refrain, the creator gives the hour of the introduction of an issue. The ruler of the fifth
house from the Rasi implied by the Dwadasamsa Rasi of the Lagna involves some house. In such
countless years the youngster will be conceived. Assume the Lagna is Aquarius 16°. It falls in
the seventh Dwadasamsa which implies Leo. If the ruler of the fifth from Leo is in Lagna, an
issue will be brought into the world in one year.
In the event that he is in the second, the third, the fourth or the fifth, then, at that point, the issue
will be conceived individually in the second, the third the fourth or the fifth year. In the event
that the master is in the seventh, the ninth, the tenth or the eleventh, the issue will be brought into
the world after medicinal measures. Assuming that he is in the sixth, the eighth or the twelfth, no
issue will be conceived.
Verse 41. Whenever Jupiter travels the fifth, the seventh, the ninth or the eleventh from the Rasi
or Navamsa Rasi, whichever is more grounded, of the Yogasphuta (referenced in refrain 34), and
the traveled Rasi is aspected by or related with benefics, there will be birth of an issue. If then
again the traveled Rasi is beset by malefics, pregnancy won't prove to be fruitful.
Refrain 42. There will be birth of a kid assuming that the point showed up at by including the
longitudes of the ascendant, the Moon, Yamakantaka and Gulika falls in an odd sign and an odd
Navamsa and a kendra or a trikona from Jupiter and if Mercury, Saturn, Rahu or Ketu are not in
a kendra or trikona.
Verse 43. Assuming that sexual association happens when Jupiter is in the Rasi or Navamsa

 involved by the ruler of the fifth, the Sun is in the Rasi and Navamsa involved by the master of
the Navamsa Lagna, and the Moon is in the Rasi and Navamsa involved by the ruler of Lagna,
the lady will consider and bring forth a kid.
NOTES
I met a Panicker, knowledgeable in Prasna Marga during one of my visits to Kerala.
As indicated by him, verse 43 is to be seen in this manner:
Jupiter's Navamsa should be in the sign involved by the ruler of the fifth. The Sun's Navamsa
should be in the sign involved by the master of the fifth from the Navamsa-Rasi of Lagna. The
Moon's Navamsa should be in the sign involved by the master of the ascendant. Sexual
association occurring under this planetary set-up outcomes in pregnancy and birth of a kid.
Obviously I have my own doubts about his translation. Model: Chart 3.

The fifth master, Mercury is in Libra Rasi and Sagittarius Navamsa. Jupiter on the way should be
in one of these signs.
Navamsa Lagna being Virgo, its ruler is Mercury who is in Libra Rasi and Sagittarius Navamsa.
The Sun ought to involve Libra or Sagittarius on the way.
The ruler of Lagna Venus is in Virgo Rasi and Taurus Navamsa. The travel Moon should be in
Taurus or Virgo.
Whenever sexual association happens under such a planetary set-up in gochara (travel), the lady
imagines effectively.
Between the Rasi and the Navamsa Rasi, the more grounded one is to be thought of.
The mixes, given in this verse, are as per our creator, a mystery piece of information given by his
own Guru.
Refrain 44. Find out the day on which the Moon travels the Dwadasamsa Rasi of the amount of
the longitudes of the ascendant and the Moon; the month when the Sun travels the sign implied
by the amount of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon; the year, when Jupiter travels the sign
got by adding the longitudes of the ascendant, the Moon and Jupiter; and the specific Rasi by
adding the longitudes of the ascendant, the Sun, the Moon and Gulika. Assuming sexual
association happens under the above set-up, pregnancy brings about the introduction of a
youngster.
NOTES
This verse empowers one to fix up a period for the sexual association to bring about origination
and later on in the introduction of an issue.
The above refrain is addressed by the accompanying recipe:
Year: Lagna + Moon + Jupiter - a Month: Sun + Moon.
Day: (Lagna + Moon).

=c

b

 Dwadasamsa Rasi of c gives the day. Time: Lagna + Sun + Moon + Gulika = d.
The year Jupiter travels a, the month when the Sun travels b, the day when the Moon travels the
Dwadasamsa Rasi of c and when d ascents on Lagna is the suitable time for sexual association.
Whenever Rasi is referenced it naturally follows that the Navamsa Rasi is likewise inferred.
Hence in the event that the Sun 4 the Moon is in Aquarius Rasi and Libra Navamsa, the more
grounded of the two should be thought of.
Here is a technique for deciding the fruitful period for sexual congress. Childless couples
wanting for kids can time their associations as per the recipe given here.
Verse 45. The planets that join or perspective the master of the fifth house (or the sign and
Navamsa involved by the ruler of the fifth) demonstrate the standing of the lady through whom a
youngster is to be conceived. In the event that the master of the fifth is aspected by Jupiter and
Venus, the querist will have issues through his own significant other.
NOTES
The most grounded of (a) the planets that join the master of the fifth, (b) the planets that
viewpoint the ruler of the fifth, or (c) the sign and Navamsa involved by the master of the fifth
will provide the insight into foresee the rank of the one who brings forth the youngster. Jupiter
and Venus aspecting the fifth or ruler of the fifth is to the point of recommending that the issue
will be through the married spouse.
The vast majority of the old style authors settle on real issue, i.e., through one's married spouse
in the event that Jupiter is involved.

As per Varahamihira in his Brihat Jataka, the Sun and Mars rule the royal standing (Kshatriyas
or champion races) and eminence, the Moon and Mercury demonstrate Vaisyas (exchanging
local area). Jupiter and Venus demonstrate Brahmins, Saturn Chandalas or outcastes and Ketu
and Rahu, the demoniacal or the exceptionally heterodox, outsiders, non-Hindus, and so forth
Contingent in the world in question, the standing of the one who will bear one's issue can be
made out.

Verse 46. On the off chance that the Yogasphuta shaped by adding the longitudes of the
ascendant and Yama-kantaka turns out to be in a typical sign, no youngster will be conceived. In
the event that the Yogasphuta is distressed by malefics, the spouse will be fruitless. In the event
that the Sphuta is in Virgo and aspected by Mercury and Saturn, he will have two embraced kids.
NOTES
Verse 46 gives three blends for childlessness, infertility and reception. They can be recorded
sequentially as follows:
(a)
x.

Call the point showed up at by adding the longitudes of the ascendant and Yamakantaka as

 (b)

If x falls in a typical sign, no kid is conceived.

(c)

If x is tormented by the part of or relationship with malefics, the spouse will be desolate

(d) If x ends up falling in Virgo and is aspected by Mercury and Saturn, two youngsters will
be taken on.
My conversations with some pandits experienced in the procedures of Prasna Marga have
uncovered that as per them the mix can keep the birth from getting a youngster from the primary
spouse, which infers (as indicated by the then common custom) that the local would wed a
second wife for bringing forth a kid. Imagine a scenario in which the subsequent marriage
likewise neglected to give a kid ? The pandits say that if x possesses Sagittarius (rather than
Virgo), the primary spouse gets a youngster after the subsequent marriage. Assuming x is in
Pisces, he weds a third spouse from whom he gets an issue. Assuming it is arranged in a typical
sign and gets the part of benefics or benefics conjoin it, every one of the three spouses will bring
forth issues.
In the illumination of the cutting edge social set-up, the subtleties outfitted here could be of just
scholarly interest.
Refrain 47. Assuming the Yogasphuta is conjoined with Mars and Saturn and aspected by the
Sun and Mercury, took on youngsters fight. Assuming that Jupiter and Venus partner or
perspective the second, the took on youngster will be cheerful towards its folks.

NOTES
Assuming that x alluded to in the past refrain has the relationship of Mercury and Saturn and the
part of the Sun, the two took on kids won't manage everything well. If rather than the Sun,
Jupiter and Venus perspective, the youngster embraced for the subsequent time will succeed and
won't be pugnacious. In different words, the reception will be a triumph.
At the point when Mercury is related to x, the Sun would angle it as Mercury be able to can
never be arranged past 37° from the Sun. It isn't certain if any fractional angle is indicated.
With verse 47 the subject of kids closes.
Refrain 48. The inquiry with respect to the eventual fate of the youngster in the belly is known
as "garbha prasna" it is to be addressed along these lines.
Refrain 49 The Garbha Prasna Lagna (descendants - ascendant) is the Yogasphuta framed by
adding the ascendant and Yamakantaka. Insights concerning the mother must be perused from
this ascendant and the Moon. The seventh house starting here and the Sun address the dad. The
idea of the offspring, and so on, ought to be discovered from Jupiter.
NOTES
x alluded to in the notes under verse 46 and the Moon empower us to get insights regarding the
mother; the seventh from x and the Sun show insights regarding the dad. Jupiter's position will
uncover whether or not the pregnancy prompts birth of an issue.

 Verse 50. The ascendant, the Moon, the seventh house, the Sun and Jupiter powerless and
aspected by malefics cause the demise of the guardians. Assuming Jupiter alone is solid, the
youngster alone will make due.
NOTES
In the question graph the ascendant, the Moon, the Sun, the seventh house and Jupiter should be
generally delivered powerless (nirveerya) and aspected by malefics (asubhair vilokyate). The
above given elements can become feeble whenever joined by malefics. On the off chance that
malefics viewpoint or conjoin, the variables become feeble and the guardians and the kid in the
belly will all kick the bucket. Assuming Jupiter is delivered solid, the kid endures however the
dad and mother might kick the bucket.
Verse 51. Assuming the ascendant, the ruler of the ascendant and the Moon are feeble being
tormented by malefic planets, the pregnant lady will bite the dust. Assuming Jupiter is frail, the
youngster likewise will kick the bucket. On the off chance that the seventh house, the ruler of the
seventh, and the Sun are completely distressed, the dad will kick the bucket. Here again
assuming Jupiter is solid, the dad will kick the bucket, solely after the protected conveyance of
the kid.
Refrain 52. The Sun in relationship with Mars demonstrates sickness to father. The Moon with
Saturn indicates sickness to mother. Assuming the Moon is aspected by some malefics and
related with some malefics among the three viz., Mars, Saturn and Rahu, then, at that point, the
lady will pass on in her pregnancy. On the off chance that the Sun is tormented by the three
malefics and is without benefic impact, the dad of the kid will kick the bucket before its
introduction to the world. The kid will bite the dust on the off chance that Jupiter is tormented.
NOTES
The demise of the mother and the dad and the youngster in the belly and regardless of whether
the dad alone bites the dust and assuming this is the case previously or after the introduction of
the youngster, can be in every way anticipated by a cautious thought of the blends recorded in
this refrain. At the point when the word 'beset' is utilized, it suggests that the planet concerned is
either aspected by or conjoined with a malefic or malefics and isn't dependent upon any benefic
impacts. The three strong malefics are Mars, Saturn and Rahu. The power of the hardship relies
on the quantity of malefics involved. If all the malefics cause the difficulty and in the event that
any benefics influence the torment, the expectation is to be as needs be adjusted.
Refrain 53. If in the question diagram malefics possess the twelfth from the point showed up at
by adding the longitudes of the ruler of the twelfth house and Jupiter, the introduction of an issue
is denied. Assuming this hardship is found in the birth diagrams of the couple, the showed
occasion will undoubtedly occur.
Assuming that the asterism acquired by the expansion of the longitudes of Gulika and
Yamakantaka, turns out to be the third, the fifth or seventh from the natal stars of the spouse and
husband, there will be no issue.

NOTES

 From certain perspectives, other than the longitudes of Jupiter and the ruler of the twelfth house,
the longitude of Arudha Lagna ought to likewise be added and the subsequent sign considered.
The verse says - ripha jeevayoga bhavanete - the longitudes of the ruler of the twelfth (ripha) and
Jupiter (jeeva). How or why Arudha is to be incorporated, isn't exactly clear.
Verse 54. In the event that Rahu involves the fifth house or connects with the ruler of the fifth
unaspected by benefics, the youngster passes on because of the scourge of the snake god.
Refrain 55. Assuming Saturn conjoins with Gulika in the ascendant, the fifth or the ninth with
no part of benefic planets, demise of the issue is because of genealogical revile.
Verse 56. The master of the fifth in relationship with Mars or the ruler of the sixth and without
benefic impacts makes the passing of the issue due the scourge of the foes.
Refrain 57. The master of the fifth in the fifth without benefic angle however dependent upon
the part of malefic planets indicates the scourge of the Devas.
Verse 58. When malefics possess the fourth, house, Saturn gets together with the ruler of the
fifth and malefics are in the twelfth, demise of the kid will be because of mother's revile.
Refrain 59. If malefics involve the ninth, master of the fifth joins Saturn and Gulika possesses a
threefold spot, demise of the issue is because of the scourge of the dad.
NOTES
The over five refrains winnowed out by the creator from Prasna Sangraha give mixes which
demonstrate the demise of the kid because of condemnations.
Many may not be leaned to put stock in the viability of gifts and the force of condemnations in
this trendy age of the supposed "logical attitude". It can't be rejected that there are a few people
brought into the world with solid interests which generally track down articulation in incurring
wounds for other people. At the point when such people 'revile', almost certainly, the revile may
hurt the casualty looking like his not generating any issues.
At the point when youngsters who have been raised with love and thought let down their matured
guardians who are needing care, consideration and friendship from them, it is regular that the
guardians might feel unpleasant and despondent. This feeling might put itself out there as a
parental revile, in any event, when the guardians might not have expected it. It is Rahu's burden
of the multitude of elements associated with the fifth house that provides some insight into the
idea of the revile.
As indicated by the over five refrains:
Snake god's revile: Rahu in the fifth, or with the fifth ruler, without beneh'c perspectives. Revile
of the manes: Saturn with Gulika in the first, fifth or ninth, without valuable viewpoint.
Revile of the foes: Lord of the fifth with Mars or ruler of the sixth without benefic angles.
Revile of the devas (divine beings): Lord of the fifth in the fifth without benefic perspective
however dependent upon malefic angle.
Mother's revile: Malefics in the fourth, Saturn in relationship with the fifth ruler and malefics in

 the twelfth.
Father's revile: Malefics in the ninth, the master of the fifth with Saturn and Gulika in the first,
fifth or ninth.
Whether or not we append any significance to endowments and condemnations, obviously when
the place of kids is tormented under the blends given over, one should be cautious in surveying
the "torments" prior to giving out his finding.
Again in the accompanying refrains a few additional mixes for death of youngsters because of
condemnations, are recorded, taken from Prasna Sangraha.
Verse 60. Whenever the masters of the Lagna and the fifth and Jupiter are feeble as additionally
the illuminating presences and the ruler of the ninth, kids will kick the bucket because of the
scourge of the Devas.
Refrain 61. At the point when the previously mentioned Yoga is available and Jupiter or Venus
is conjoined by insidious planets, Brahmins might be the reason for the revile.
Assuming the Sun and the Moon are beset by malefics or they are crippled or possess unfriendly
signs, then, at that point, the wellspring of the revile will be the manes.
Refrain 62. The masters of the ascendant and the fifth and Jupiter are delivered weak and
involve the sixth, the eighth or the twelfth; the ruler of the tenth is related with or aspected by
malefics; then, at that point, his own wicked deeds have made him issueless.

Verse 63. The rulers of the ascendant and the fifth and Jupiter are powerless, the master of the
sixth and Mars are solid and partner with the past referenced rulers; or Mars and master of the
sixth possess the fifth house; then, at that point, the abhichara of foes is the justification behind
childlessness.
Refrain 64. Masters of Lagna and the fifth and Jupiter are solid; malefics possess the fourth, or
the ruler of the fourth involves the sixth, the eighth or the twelfth; then, at that point, the dosha is
in his own home. In the event that the above factors, viz., master of Lagna, ruler of the fifth and
Jupiter join Rahu in the fifth house, then, at that point, the anger of the snake god is involved.
On the off chance that Mars additionally joins the abovementioned, the displeasure of the snake
is because of the local's own corrupt activities towards the snake.
Verse 65. In the event that the three variables alluded to above are solid and the Sun is related
with malefics, or the ninth house is feeble and in any case tormented, the wrongs in the
horoscope of the local's dad are answerable for the shortfall of kids; and a kid will be brought
into the world after the demise of his dad. In the event that rather than the ninth house, the fourth
house, and on second thought of the Sun, the Moon are beset as over, the evil in the local's
mom's horoscope causes the shortfall of kids; the issue will be brought into the world after the
mother's demise.
Refrain 66. If vayubhuta ascends in the ascendant, loss of kids is because of the scourge of the
manes; if agnibhuta rises, it is heavenly fury; if akasabhuta rises both pitru and deva sapas must

 be expressed. On the off chance that prithvibhuta or jalabhuta rises, kids will before long be
conceived.

NOTES
The ascending of the bhutas or components of vayu (air), agni (fire), akasa (ether), prithvi (earth)
and Jala (water) have been clarified in before refrains.
Refrain 67. Breath goes through the left nostril and the ascendant is in the Sun's hora; breath
navigates through the right nostril and the ascendant is in the Moon's hora; Arudha Lagna is even
and the ascendant is odd; the master of the fifth in the birth graph and the ruler of the fifth from
Arudha in Prasna outline are something similar; or the two rulers are firmly associated; or the
tree represented by the asterism where Jupiter remains at the hour of the question is bearing
organic products. These demonstrate gain of kids.
NOTES
Here the creator stirs up mysterious mixes, organic peculiarities and, surprisingly, the vegetable
peculiarities. Birth of youngsters is shown while the accompanying circum positions exist:
(1)

Breathing in left nostril and Lagna in the Sun's Hora.

(2)

Breathing in right nostril and the Lagna in the Moon's Hora.

(3)

Prasna Lagna odd and Arudha Lagna even.

(4) Close association (affiliation or common angle, and so forth), between the ruler of the fifth
in the Prasna diagram and the master of the fifth in the birth horoscope.
(5)

The tree showed by the asterism wherein Jupiter is set is yielding organic product.

Honestly talking we have not tried these blends. It is for perusers to try different things with
them. Contingent maybe on the presence of at least one of the above mixes we might need to
deduce about the introduction of issues.
Verse 68. In the event that the Navamsa showed up at by the option of the longitudes of the Sun,
the Moon and Jupiter turns out to be the seventh, the first, the fifth or the ninth from the
Navamsa of Gulika; assuming Jupiter is in a ternary from the Rasi or Navamsa got by adding the
longitudes of the master of the fifth and the ascendant; and assuming that Gulika involves a
ternary from Jupiter, there will be birth of youngsters.
NOTES
The verse isn't just fascinating yet gives blends which have been viewed as we would like to
think as genuinely solid. The refrain includes the accompanying contemplations:
(1)

Add together the longitudes (in the prasna graph) of the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter.

(2)

Note down the Rasi and Navamsa so showed up at.

 (3)

Note down the Navamsa of Gulika.

(4) If these two Navamsas are in common thirds or samasaptaka or resistance it is a decent
sign for getting kids.
(5)

Next include the longitudes of the first and fifth houses.

(6)

Note down the Rasi and Navamsa so showed up at.

(7) If Jupiter is in a ternary from the Rasi and Navamsa recommended in (6), it is a decent
divination for getting kids.
(8) If Gulika turns out to be in a ternary from Jupiter, it is additionally a positive variable.
Allow us to take a model (Chart 5):

(1)

The Sun 116° The Moon 53° Jupiter 222°

Accordingly, Sun + Moon + Jupiter = 391 = 31° = x
(2)

Rasi (of x) is Taurus and Navamsa (of x) Capricorn

(3)

The Navamsa of Gulika is Capricon.

(4) Both the Navamsas are something similar. In this way it is a decent prognostication for
getting kids.
(5)

Longitude of first house 312° Longitude of fifth house 72° 384 = 24° = Y

(6)

The Rasi (of Y) is Aries and the Navamsa of (Y) is Scorpio.

(7)

Jupiter isn't in a ternary from the Rasi or Navamsa recommended in (6).

(8)

Gulika isn't in a ternary from Jupiter.

Assuming that more than one component is great the introduction of kids can be anticipated.
Verse 69. In the event that Arudha is aspected by Mars, the lady can be supposed to be pregnant.
In the event that it has not the part of Mars, then, at that point, she can't be impregnated because
of overabundance of blood in her framework.
Verse 70. In the Ashtakavargas of the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter (in the horoscopes of the
couple) note the sign (in the prasna diagram) which ought to be a threefold spot from Gulika,
which has the biggest number of imprints or bindus. At the point when the Sun, the Moon and
Jupiter travel such a sign, birth of a youngster happens.
NOTES
The interpretation might have all the earmarks of being somewhat irritating.
The refrain visualizes the thought of the birth graphs of the couple and question outline. Take the
Ashtakavarga of Jupiter, say in the spouse's horoscope. Note the sign which should be a ternary
to the sign involved by Gulika in the Prasna or horary graph, which has the biggest number of

 bindus. Whenever Jupiter travels this sign birth of an issue happens. That is, the year is shown.
Moreover think about the Sun (concerning his Ashtakavarga) and the month is shown. Treat the
Moon in a similar way. The likely date will be known.
Assume in the birth horoscope, Jupiters Ashtakavarga has the biggest number of bindus, say in
Cancer. Also in the prasna outline Gulika is in Pisces. Disease turns out to be a ternary from
Pisces. At the point when Jupiter travels Cancer, the time of birth is shown. Assume in the Sun's
Ashtakavarga, the biggest number of bindus is in Cancer. Whenever the Sun travels Cancer the
occasion can occur. Likewise if in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga, the biggest number of bindus is in Scorpio, a threefold sign to Cancer, the
introduction of an issue can concur with the Moon's travel of Scorpio.
The following refrain gives the suchanas (characteristic elements) of pregnancy.
Refrain 71. To an inquiry whether or not a lady is pregnant, the response should be in the
confirmed on the off chance that Rahu involves the ascendant or Arudha or Chathra Rasi.

Refrain 72. Assuming that Jupiter involves or perspectives the fifth, the seventh or the ninth
from the ascendant or the Moon.
Verse 73. In the event that at the hour of the inquiry the Sun or the Moon is encircled by a
corona then the lady is pregnant. The idea of sex of the chiJd ought to be determined from the
planets in the seventh.
Verse 74. In the event that the Moon is related with benefics, the lady is pregnant.
Takes note of The over four verses are from Gnana Pradeepika.
Refrain 75. In the event that the master of the fifth involves an odd Rasi and an odd Navamsa
and the ruler of the ascendant is in a kendra from Gulika the lady can be supposed to be
pregnant. The said sign being seershodaya, further affirms pregnancy. In the event that the Moon
or Rahu possesses or angles the Navamsa of the ruler of the fifth, then, at that point, there are no
possibilities of pregnancy. Assuming Mars viewpoints the Navamsa there will be early
termination. If the Navamsa Rasi of the master of the fifth is in a decent sign and is adhomukha
having the perspective or combination of Saturn, then, at that point, the lady isn't just not
pregnant, however she doesn't have ordinary month to month feminine stream.
Refrain 76. In the event that at the hour of Prasna, any of the accompanying 14 signs is noticed,
the lady can be supposed to be pregnant: (1) a pregnant lady, (2) little youngsters, (3) the
thundering of thunder, (4) a male and a female bird pecking at one another, (5) the examiner or
the courier contacting his own legs, or hands or nostrils, (6) something is taken out from
something encased like a pack or vessel, (7) Venus involves the ascendant, (8) Venus
perspectives the ascendant, (9) Venus is in Arudha, (10) Venus angles Arudha, (11) Venus
possesses the fifth house from the ascendant and (12) Venus viewpoints the fifth house from the
ascendant.
NOTES

 Item No. 5 incorporates three lakshanas.
Refrain 77. (1) Gulika and the Moon are in the fifth house, (2) Gulika and the Moon are related,
(3) Mars perspectives the Moon, (4) Mars conjoins the Moon, (5) benefics involve the ninth
house, (6) the master of the fifth and Gulika conjoin, (7) Gulika angles the ruler of the fifth; and
(8) the Navamsa of Gulika and the Moon are associated together. Assuming that any of the over
eight blends is available at the hour of Prasna, the lady can be supposed to be pregnant.
Verse 78. The sign involved by the pregnant lady when the inquiry is put ought to be noted.
From the master of that sign ought to be found the flavor of the lady - sweet or harsh, and so on
Assuming the ruler is frail, it is to be derived that the woman experiences infections
demonstrated by the irritation of the dosha implied by the master.

NOTES

This verse gives a thought of the infections the pregnant lady is probably going to experience the
ill effects of. Furthermore the following verse offers lakshanas or hints characteristic of early
termination or crumbling of the Garbha.
Verse 79. The signs uncovering early termination are: The examiner or someone leaves the
prasna spot out of nowhere; or someone comes and leaves the spot unexpectedly; or the
soothsayer notices somebody eliminating clist from his ear-pit or openings in the body; or the
fifth leaf among the betel passes on given to the celestial prophet is viewed as specked with
vermins either dead or half alive.
Refrain 80. Fetus removal will result under the accompanying mixes: (a) Mars or the Sun
involves a kendra; Jupiter is in a non-kendra house. The eighth house is involved by a planet; (b)
The Moon in a quadrant, a planet in the eighth and Jupiter in a sign other than a kendra; (c) the
Moon in the ascendant and a malefic in the nineteenth Drekkana from Lagna Drekkana; (d)
Jupiter in a kendra, Mars in the eighth and the Moon in the ascendant.
Refrain 81. As recommended in Jnana Pradeepika, early termination will occur assuming
parivesha is seen at the hour of the inquiry.

NOTES
Pariveshas are haloes round the Sun and the Moon. As indicated by Varaha Mihira "the beams of
the Sun and the Moon framed into a circle by the breeze and reflected overhead with a couple of
mists become haloes with shadings and shapes. The various tones of these haloes and their
consequences for the earth are recorded".
Verse 82. Proportionately as the Moon involves an odd or even sign the off-spring will be a male
or female. Include the quantities of the work day, the star grouping and the ascendant. In the
event that the subsequent sign is odd, a male kid will be conceived. If even, a female kid will be
conceived.

 NOTES
As per the second 50% of the verse, include the quantity of Nakshatras (counted from Aswini),
the quantity of the work day (counted from Sunday) and the quantity of the ascendant (counted
from Aries). Assume the Nakshatra, work day and ascendant are separately Mrigasira, Thursday
and Aquarius. Add them together:
Mrigasira 5
Thursday 5
Aquarius 11
= 21
Canceling products of 12, the rest of 9, i.e., the ninth sign or Sagittarius which is an odd sign and
thus characteristic of birth of a male issue. From certain perspectives, this piece of the refrain
can. additionally be perceived to really intend that if out of the master of the work day, the ruler
of the Nakshatra also the master of the sign involved by the Moon, on the off chance that
something like two rulers are guys, a male issue will be conceived.
Refrain 83. Assuming the Sun or Saturn involves the third, the ninth, or the eleventh from the
ascendant, a male youngster will be conceived.
Refrain 84. Assuming all planets involve odd signs, a male kid is conceived. In the event that
every one of the planets involve even signs, birth of a female youngster is sure.
Noticed The over three verses are from Gnana Deepika.
Verse 85. Proportionately as most of the vargas of the ascendant are administered by male or
female planets, a child or a girl is conceived.
NOTES
Discover the leaders of the saptavargas of the ascendant. Assuming most of rulers are manly
planets, i.e., the Sun, Jupiter and Mars, the issue will be male. Assuming most of the planets
controlling the saptavargas are female planets, i.e., Mercury, Venus and the Moon, a female birth
happens.
The above verse is from Vidwajjana Vallabha.
Verse 86. All the benefics in the fifth and the eleventh houses show that the lady is pregnant. In
the event that the ascendant is in an odd sign and the planets the Sun, Jupiter and the Moon are
likewise in odd signs, the kid is a male.
Verse 87. Assuming that the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter and the ascendant are all in even signs,
the kid will be a female. Assuming that Saturn involves odd signs, the kid is a male.
Verse 88. The Sun and Jupiter are solid and possess odd signs, it shows a male kid. Venus, Mars
and the Moon involving even signs signify a female issue.
Refrain 89. The issue will be a child or a little girl to the extent that Saturn possesses an odd or
even sign. In an inquiry bearing on marriage, assuming that Saturn involves an odd sign,

 marriage will occur soon. If not marriage won't occur.
NOTES
This refrain is from Shatpanchasikha. All the above mixes are to be applied to prasna or horary
graphs.
Verse 90, The Sun, Mars and Jupiter in the seventh house indicate a male issue. The Moon,
Mercury and Venus in the seventh house demonstrate a female. Again assuming the Sun, Mars
and Jupiter are in the ascendant, the youngster is a male. Assuming that the Moon, Mercury and
Venus are in Lagna, the issue is a female. Saturn in the ascendant gives a child.

Refrain 91. Assuming the examiner or the courier contacts the odd appendages of his body with
his right hand, then, at that point, the youngster is a male. In the event that he contacts the even
appendages of his body with his left hand, the issue is a female. Assuming that he contacts the
even appendages with his right hand the youngster bites the dust.

NOTES
The odd appendages of his body are: head, chest, stomach, vasthi, thighs, legs. The even
appendages of his body are: face, heart, midsection, sex organs, knees and feet. The sex of the
dead youngster can be known from the idea of the appendages contacted.
Verse 92. On the off chance that the Navamsas of Arudha and Lagna end up being even and they
are aspected by the Moon, Venus and Mercury, female twins will be conceived.
NOTES
Saturn likewise can be incorporated among male planets.
Refrain 93. Assuming Jupiter possesses a ternary or a quadrant, the kid is a male. In the event
that any questions emerge at the hour of inquiry in regards to these, one ought to depend on what
one sees or hears around and furthermore from the signs one notices and afterward anticipate the
sex.
Refrain 94. If at the hour of prasna numerous guys are seen or heard or spoken about, or then
again on the off chance that Arudha turns out to be an odd sign involved or aspected by manly
planets, or then again assuming the courier or examiner remains in the four fundamental Diks
(east, south, west and north), or on the other hand assuming the gifts brought to the crystal gazer
end up being odd in number, or then again on the off chance that these presents are held in the
right hand on the right side, then, at that point, the issue is a male. If any other way, the
youngster will be a female.
NOTES
Surprisingly females are seen or ladies are heard talking, or accounts of ladies are being
discussed, or even signs end up being Arudha, and female planets possess or perspective the
equivalent, or the courier involves the excess 4 Diks (S.E., S.W., N.W., and N.E.) or the presents

 brought are even in number when included or they are held in the left hand on the left side, then,
at that point, the issue is a female.
Refrain 95. At the point when the examiner puts his inquiry he contacts his head or any
appendage on the right half of his body; or when the Navamsa Lagna turns out to be an odd and
diurnal sign or when Saturn and solid Mercury possess odd signs, then, at that point, the kid is a
male.

NOTES
Running against the norm, assuming that he contacts any appendages on the left half of his body
or when Navamsa Lagna turns out to be an even and nighttime sign or when Saturn and Mercury
possess even signs, the youngster is a female.
The over four verses are from Prasna Sangraha.
Verse 96. Whenever the Sun, the Moon, Jupiter and the ascendant - generally solid, are put in
odd signs and odd Navamsas, the issue is a male; when these four are in even signs and even
Navamsas the issue is a female. Whenever the Sun and Jupiter possess odd signs, the kid is a
male. In the event that the Moon, Venus and Mars are in even signs, the youngster is a female.
At the point when they are in like manner signs, the issue is a twin. In any case, on the off chance
that these four have the part of Mercury and possess odd Navamsa, the twins are females.
NOTES
The above intense verse is cited from Varaha Mihira's Brihat Jataka. Whenever the planets and
the ascendant are referenced it is suggested that they ought to be strong. The blends can be
recorded as follows:
(a) The Sun, the Moon, the ascendant and Jupiter in odd signs and in odd Navamsas - male
issue.
(b)

Above in even signs and even Navamsas - female.

(c)

Jupiter and the Sun in odd signs - male.

(d)

The Moon, Venus and Mercury in even signs - female.

(e) Jupiter, the Sun, Venus and Mercury in like manner signs and in odd or even Navamsas,
aspected by Mercury - twins.
(f)

The over four in like manner signs and odd Navamsas aspected by Mercury - male

twins.- female.
(g)

The over four in like manner signs and even Navamsas - female twins.

(h)

If the impact for both male and female twins are adjusted - one male and another,

This large number of mixes can't be available in the Prasna (or origination) diagram. If one of the

 8 mixes is available, the outcome credited ought to be anticipated.
Undoubtedly, my own experience is that it works reasonably acceptably.
In the above refrain a few adaptations read mitra-cha, rather than yagrascha.

Refrain 97. At the point when Saturn possesses an odd sign, with the exception of the ascendant,
the youngster has a place with the male sex. Making a decision about the planets recently
referenced and their solidarity one is to choose the idea of the sex of the kid to be conceived.
Refrain 98. Fourteen lakshanas each for male and female births have been given.
Adjusting the lakshanas the sex of the kid ought to be induced.
NOTES
Lakshanas are characteristic signs or mixes recorded in the over two refrains If the lakshanas for
male birth are more than those for female birth, the kid to be conceived will be a child; if in any
case, a little girl. Here the crystal gazer's ability to break down the mix chooses the induction.
Refrain 99 The terms Arudha and Lagna are compatible. However, the strength of the two
should be utilized while analyzing the impacts.
Verse 100. If the ascendant falls in an odd sign and in an odd Navamsa, the kid is a male.
Assuming that the ascendant is in an even sign and an even Navamsa, the youngster is a female.
Refrain 101. Assuming the Navamsa of the ascendant and Arudha are even and female planets
possess something very similar, birth of female twins is shown. On the off chance that these
Navamsa-signs are odd conjoined by male planets, the introduction of male twins is shown.

NOTES
A few soothsayers of Kerala think that both Navamsa and Rasi must be thought about to have the
fundamental impact.
Verse 102. In the event that the examiner feels with his hands those appendages of the body
which are odd, then, at that point, male issue can be anticipated. In the event that he contacts
anyway the appendages which are considered 'even', female issue will be conceived.
NOTES
Odd appendages are the nose, mouth, the head, and so on, while even appendages are the eyes,
ears, hands, and so on
Refrain 103. Assuming the examiner feels with his right hand appendages of the body which are
on the left, the kid, a female, will bite the dust. In actuality, assuming he contacts with his left
hand the left half of his body, the issue, a male, will pass on.
Verse 104. On the off chance that the articles brought by the examiner are kept on the right half

 of his individual or on the other hand assuming they are odd in number; or then again assuming
that his developments demonstrate those of a man, the youngster is a male. On the off chance
that the presents so brought are kept or concealed on the left half of his individual or then again
assuming they are even in number or then again on the off chance that his developments mark
him out as womanly, the kid is a young lady.
Refrain 105. Convert the longitude of the ascendant (without signs) into minutes. Increase this
by 3 and separation the item by 50. The remainder addresses the signs and the rest of. To this add
the quantity of the Rasi of the ascendant. The total addresses the Sun's situation at the hour of
conveyance.
Duplicate the longitude of the Sun by 108. The item addresses the Moon's positional conveyance.
Add to the Moon's position so acquired the longitude of the ascendant without the sign and
increase the absolute by 9. The Sun's Navamsa is got.
NOTES
This verse is a piece confounding. By and by I have not tried this technique and would
subsequently pass on it to the perusers to test it and structure their own viewpoints.
The verse should empower one to find out the month and date of conveyance. The technique is
as per the following:

(i)

Convert the longitude of the Ascendant (without signs) into minutes = a.

(ii)

Multiply a by 3 = b.

(iii)

Divide b by 50.

b/50 = x (remainder) + y (remaining portion)
(iv)

(x + y) + Rasi of the Ascendant = s which is the place of the Sun at conveyance.

(v)

Multiply s by 108 = m, the Moon's position,

(vi)

m + longitude of Ascendant (without signs) increased by 9 gives the Sun's Navamsa.

Model:
Allow Ascendant to be 16° 45' Libra,
(I) a = 16° 45' x 60' = 1005'
(ii)

a x 3 = 3015 = b

(iii)

b/50 = 3015/50 = remainder 60 (x) + remaining portion 15 (y).

(iv) s = 60.3 signs + 7 = 67.3 signs = 67 signs 9 degrees. That is, canceling products of 12, we
get 7 signs 9 degrees or Scorpio 9 degrees as the place of the Sun at conveyance.
(v)

The Moon's position m = s x 108

 i.e., 7s 9° x 108 = 756s 972° = 11s 12°= Pisces 12° as Moon's position = Pisces 12°.
(vi)

m + Ascendant longitude (without signs)

- (342° + 16° 45') x 9 Sun's Navamsa = 358° 45' x 9 - 348° 45' or Pisces 18° 45'.
This will be the Navamsa position of the Sun at conveyance.
As the conveyance happens in the tenth month change the month by taking the threefold or
trikona Rasis too.
As currently recommended above, I have given the strategy as perceived by me. It is for perusers
to survey its legitimacy when really applied.
Refrain 106. At the point when the Moon travels the Dwadasamsa Rasi of the master of the
kakshya, in which the longitude of Lagna falls, indications of conveyance will start. Whenever
the Moon travels the Navamsa Rasi of the master of the kakshya, the lady will convey. The
ascendant at the hour of conveyance will be that sign in which the master of the Trimsamsa of
the ruler of the kakshya remains at the hour of question. In the event that the master of the Hora
of the previously mentioned ruler of kakshya is the Sun, conveyance will be in the daytime;
assuming the Moon, conveyance will be in the evening.

NOTES
In the ashtaka varga plot, the planets are fanned out in the request for (through and through)
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon and the Ascendant. There are 8
kakshyas, each being of 3° 45'.

Take the ascendant master. Discover the kakshya in which he is put. Assume the ascendant is
Capricorn 4°. This falls in the kakshya of Jupiter. See which Dwadasamsa is involved by Jupiter.
At the point when the Moon travels this Dwadasamsa Rasi, work torments might set in. See
where Jupiter (the kakshya ruler) is in the Navamsa. Whenever this Navamsa Rasi is traveled by
the Moon, the conveyance happens. Find in which Trimsamsa, Jupiter (master of the kakshya) is
set. The indication of this Trimsamsa master will be the ascendant at the hour of conveyance. To
the extent that Jupiter (master of the kakshya) is in the Sun's or alternately Moon's Hora, the
conveyance will be during the day or during the evening.
These verses offer a lot of nourishment for reflection and much extension for research. Let our
clinical men thus called researchers make explores into this specific part of information as
opposed to broadcasting their oblivious perspectives on crystal gazing.
Verse 107. Take the more grounded of the Drekkanas of the Sun and the Moon. At the point
when the Moon travels this Drekkana Rasi, conveyance happens, gave the Sun or the Moon is in
the first Drekkana. Assuming the Drekkana is the second, conveyance happens when the Moon
travels the fifth from the Drekkana Rasi. At the point when the Drekkana is the third then, at that
point, birth of the issue happens when the Moon travels the ninth from the Drekkana Rasi; or
take the Dwadasamsa of the Moon. Count this Dwadasamsa Rasi number from Aries. At the

 point when the Moon travels this sign conveyance happens.
NOTES
Model:
Sun = 6 degrees Aries, i.e., Aries Drekkana Moon = 17 degrees Cancer, i.e., Scorpio Drekkana.
Between the two, the Sun possessing his worship drekkana is the more grounded.
Whenever the Moon travels Aries, conveyance of the youngster might be normal, the Sun being
in the principal Drekkana.
Should the Sun be in Aries 13 degrees, the Drekkana would be Leo regardless more grounded
than the Moon in Scorpio Drekkana. For this situation, conveyance happens when the Moon
travels the fifth from the Drekkana Rasi, i.e., the fifth from Leo which would be Sagittarius.
In the event that the Sun possesses 23° Aries or the third Drekkkana of Aries, birth would happen
when the Moon travels Leo, the ninth from the Drekkana Rasi of the Sun, to be specific
Sagittarius.
Then again, take the Dwadasamsa of the Moon. The Moon being in 17 degrees Cancer it would
be the seventh Dwadasamsa. The issue might be conveyed when the Moon goes through the
seventh sign from Aries, viz., Libra.
Refrain 108. Increase the longitude of the Moon (without sign) by 108 and discover the
subsequent Rasi. At the point when the Moon travels this or its threefold sign (whichever is
adhomukha), conveyance will happen. The occasion will be sure assuming Gulika partners or
angles this Rasi.
Observe the star grouping showed up at by adding the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon.
At the point when the Moon travels this heavenly body, conveyance happens.
NOTES
Model: Moon 24° 12' Cancer.
Sun 8° 45' Scorpio. Technique 1:
Taking the longitude of the Moon without the sign, we have 24° 12' = 24.2 degrees.
24.2 x 108 = 2613.6 degrees. Canceling products of 360, we get 93.6 degrees or Cancer 3.6
degrees.
Scorpio and Pisces are threefold to it. Of the three. Malignant growth and Pisces are adhomukha
signs. The Moon's travel of Cancer or Pisces shows the conveyance of the child, the more
grounded of the two signs being more probable. Further, assuming Gulika goes along with one of
these signs, that sign is affirmed. Technique 2:
Sun + Moon = 218° 45' + 114° 12'
= 332° 57' = Poorvabhadrapada.
Whenever the Moon travels Poorvabhadrapada, conveyance happens.

 There is an idea that the amount of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon (as far as Rasis)
ought to be deducted from 12 and the subsequent group of stars ought to be thought of. From
certain perspectives, this progression is important just when the Rasi showed up at by adding the
longitudes of the Sun and the Moon is a nighttime one.
Refrain 109. The amount of the longitudes of the ascendant and the Moon, without the signs,
ought to be increased by 12 and the subsequent Nakshatra discovered. At the point when the
Moon travels this Nakshatra or its threefold one, conveyance happens.
The occasion can likewise happen when the Moon travels the fifth from the Dwadasamsa Rasi of
the Moon, at the hour of question; or its thirds. Both the strategies ought to be looked at and the
fitting one chose.

NOTES
Model:
Let the Ascendant be 312° 40' and the Moon, 123° 12'.
Ascendant + Moon = 312° 40' + 123° 12' = 435° 52'.
Canceling products of 360 = 75° 52' = Gemini 15° 52'.
Taking the resultant longitude without the sign we get 15° 52' or 15° 86 degrees.
15.86 x 12 - 190.32 which counted from the primary mark of Aries gives Swati (2).
The occasion happens when the Moon travels Swati (2) or its threefold focuses, Satabhisha (2)
and

Aridra (2). On the other hand:
The Dwadasamsa Rasi of the Moon is Virgo. Conveyance might occur when Virgo or its thirds,
Capricorn or Taurus, is transitted by the Moon.
Verse 110. Birth might happen in the Dwadasamsa Rasi of Lagna or the Navamsa Rasi of the
ruler of the Dwadasamsa Rasi. These turning out to be thirds (to the Lagna) or having
sambandha chatustaya varga are a further affirmation. The Navamsa Rasi of Gulika and its thirds
can likewise be the "indication of conveyance".

NOTES
As per some the Navamsa Rasi of Gulika as the evening of the prasna day is significant. The
Lagna at the hour of conveyance could be any of the accompanying signs:
(1)

The Dwadasamsa Rasi of Lagna.

(2)

The Navamsa Rasi of the ruler of the Dwadasamsa Rasi of Lagna.

 For example on the off chance that Lagna is in Virgo Dwadasamsa and in the event that the
master of this, viz., Mercury is in Capricorn Navamsa, the conveyance sign will be Virgo or
Capricorn.
On the off chance that Virgo or Capricorn is ternary to the Lagna, it is a further affirmation.
(3) The Navamsa Rasi of Gulika, or at least, on the off chance that say Gulika is in Aquarius
Navamsa, Aquarius can be the ascendant at the hour of conveyance.
Of the numerous Rasis given - that which is associated with Gulika has the most noteworthy
possibility turning into the Lagna at the hour of the introduction of the youngster.
Refrain 111. Conveyance might happen when the Dwadasamsa Rasi of the Sun or its thirds
rises. Dwadasamsa Rasi and the Navamsa Rasi of the ascendant may likewise be thought of. The
overall strength of these ought to be gauged and inclination offered to the hint having the
association of Gulika.
Verse 112. The Varga Chatushtaya is subsequently acquired. Navamsa - by increasing a planet's
longitude by 9; Nava Navamsa by duplicating a planet's longitude by 81; Navamsa Dwadasamsa
- The Navamsa longitude without sign is increased by 12 and the signs overlooked before are
added; and Dwadasamsa - increasing the longitude of a planet without signs by 12 and adding to
the outcome, the first Rasis prior excluded.
NOTES
This refrain empowers us to compute 4 significant divisional diagrams, viz., (1) Navamsa, (2)
Nava Navamsa, (3) Navamsa Dwadasamsa and (4) Dwadasamsa. While Navamsa and
Dwadasamsa are normal in all course books on soothsaying Nava Navamsa and Navamsa
Dwadasamsa are unconventional to this work. We will apply the standards to a model, viz., the
Sun's situation at the hour of prasna, viz., Cancer 23° 12' or 113°.2.
(1)

Navamsa: Multiply the longitude by 9.

113°.2 x 9 = I018°.8. Erasing different of 360 we get 298°.8'. Isolating this by 30, the outcome is
9s 28° 48'or Capricorn 28° 48'. This is the place of the Sun in Navamsa.
(2) Nava Navamsa: When a planet's longitude is increased by 81, this divisional graph is
acquired:
In the model:
113°.2 x 81 - 9169°.2
Erasing products of 360, the rest of 169°-2 which is 5s 19° 12'. The place of the planet in Nava
Navamsa graph is Virgo 19° 12'.
(3) Navamsa Dwadasamsa: The Navamsa longitude without signs (for example 28° 48' or
28°.8) is increased by 12.
i.e., 28.8 x 12 - 345.6 - 11s 15°.6.

 The overlooked signs, viz., 9 are added to this (11s 15°.6 + 9 = 20s 15°.6 = 8s 15°.6).
Consequently the Navamsa Dwadasamsa of the planet is 8s 15°.6 or Sagittarius 15° 36'.
(4) Dwadasamsa: The longitude of a planet (without signs) is increased by 12. 23°.2 x 12 =
278° 4 = 9s 8°.4
To this is added the signs before overlooked, viz., 3. Consequently the Dwadasamsa position of
the planet is 9s 8°.4 + 3s = 12s 8° 24' = Aries 8° 24'.
The accuracy of these discoveries can be checked by applying the standard techniques for
working out divisional outlines. Here, each outline is made identical to a total circle and
henceforth the longitude of even the sub-divisional graph is given.
Verse 113. (a) When the Moon travels the Arudha Lagna or a threefold sign from it which ought
to turn out to be Adhomukba', birth of the youngster happens. This ought to be stayed quiet.

NOTES
Kerala stargazers seem to take the Ascendant and its thirds likewise as conveyance signs.
Assume the Arudha is Aries. The thirds are Leo and Sagittarius, Sagittarius is Adhomukha.
Whenever the Moon travels this sign the issue will be conceived.
Refrain 114. Assuming planets are ominously arranged making block birth of issues one should
turn to medicinal measures.
Verse 115. On the off chance that the Sun or Saturn joined by the Moon involves an anishta
place in an odd sign the Pitris should be appeased. On the off chance that the Sun involves an
even sign, sacred sanctuaries ought to be visited and kshetra pinda advertised. Moreover on the
off chance that Saturn possesses an abhorrent house and an even sign, 'food' should be proposed
to individuals. The Sun in odd or even sign (in an insidious Bhava) requires the presentation of
Japa as a therapeutic measure.
Refrain 116. Assuming the Moon is in Anishta Bhavas, Sraddhas ought to be performed at
Gaya. Or on the other hand performers ought to be locked in to sing and move in the Divine
presence. Assuming the Sun and the Moon are both tormented by abhorrent planets, the
difficulty is from pretas; and for their freedom, kshetra pinda ought to be performed and
reflection music sung.
Refrain 117. At the point when Mars is in an Anishta Rasi which, is additionally odd, love ought
to be proposed to Lord Subrahmanya and blessed Brahmins took care of. At the point when Mars
is in an even sign Durga ought to be revered. Assuming that Mercury is correspondingly
arranged Lord Vishnu ought to be revered with panchamruta and payasa, Brahmins ought to be
taken care of and soubhagya sukta recited.
Refrain 118. Assuming that Jupiter is in an Anishta place in an odd sign kalyanadighrita
appropriately accused of mantras ought to be consumed. Assuming that Jupiter possesses an even
anishta sign, Sankaranarayana should be venerated and 1,000 Brahmins took care of
extravagantly.

 Verse 119. On the off chance that Venus involves an anishta sign and an odd sign, yakshapuja
ought to be performed with bread, payasa, aromas tunes and music. Assuming Venus involves an
even troublesome house, puja ought to be proposed to the divine beings and Brahmins took care
of agreeable to them.
Refrain 120. Assuming Saturn is liable for the shortfall of issue and he possesses an odd sign in
a negative house, sarpa ball should be performed. Assuming he involves an even sign, snake
dance ought to be finished by artists. Assuming that Saturn is in an ominous situation in like
manner signs, snake pictures ought to be gifted.

NOTES
Verses 114 to 120 arrangement with therapeutic measures to kill difficulties emerging from
certain plenetary setups which impede the introduction of issues.
Birth of kids is supposed to be denied by various causes followed to the disappointment of
predecessors, and so on
The difficulty emerges by the circumstance of a planet in an anishta bhava or house. The idea of
cure relies on the odd or even nature of the sign the anishta bhava falls in. The refrains are
straightforward and can be effectively perceived.
This multitude of cures are followed to specific condemnations - sapas. We don't wish to
mention any observable facts regarding whether or not such reviles truly work. Western science
can't arrogate to itself all information. Subject matters at this point unclear to western science had
been contemplated and perceived by the old soothsayers. The people who don't wish to have
confidence in th'ese cures or the hardships given, are at freedom to dismiss them, yet there are
factors which apparently incomprehensible may contain beginnings of truth.
Refrain 121. The santana tithi ought to be worked out from santana Sun and santhana Moon.
This tithi must be utilized in deciding the introduction of an issue.
NOTES

The accompanying refrains give the strategies for working santana Sun, santana Moon, and so on
Verse 122. As indicated by a few Acharyas, multiple times the Moon's longitudes and multiple
times the Lagna longitude give the offspring Moon (santana chandra) and the descendants Sun
(santana Sun) individually.

NOTES
This verse recommends that the strategy for ascertaining the offspring Sun and the descendants
Moon given here is as per some Acharyas, and that implies there might be some other technique
maybe endorsed by the creator of this work. The original copy in my ownership doesn't contain
this technique. Yet, I have assembled from Kerala pandits that the technique acknowledged by

 the creator is the accompanying:
"Ishta" or the hour of Prasna decreased to vighatis is partitioned by 50. Convert this into signs,
degrees and minutes. Call this x. From this deduct 30° or one Rasi. The rest of by 5 gives the
Santana Surya.
Add 8 signs and 15 degrees to x. Canceling products of 12 multiplythe coming about figure by 5
and you get San tana Chandra. We will call the technique given in the refrain as An and that
clarified in the Notes as B and work out a model.

Model: 'A': Sun Cancer 23° 12' = (3s 23° 12') Moon = Taurus 27° 26' = (ls 27° 26')
Descendants Sun 3s 23° 12' x 5 = 18* 26°
= 6s 26°
= Libra 26° Progeny Moon 1s 27° 26' x 5 = 9s 17° 10'
= Capricorn 17° 10' Example B Birth time: Ghatis 32 and vigbatis 45 after dawn.
= 32 x 60 + 45
= 1965 vighatis
1965/50 = 39s 15°/50
Duplicating the rest of 30 (to change over it into degrees), we get 15 x 30/50 = 9°
Erasing products of 12 from 39, we get 3s 9° x Deducting one sign from x, the rest of (3s 9° - 1s
) = 2s 9° or Gemini 9°.
Increasing 2s 9° by 5 we get Santana Surya or Progeny Sun = 2s 9° x 5
= 10s 45° = lis 15° or Aquarius 15° Adding 8 signs and 15 degrees to x, we have 3s 9° +

8s 15°

= 11s 24°. Increasing this by 5
11s 24° x 5 = 59s = 11s = Aquarius 30°. This is Santana Chandra or descendants Moon.
The other hypothesis is, this technique ought to be applied in the event that Aroodha Lagna is
solid. On the off chance that the

Prasna Lagna is solid the technique given in refrain 122 ought to be applied.
In all honesty, I have not had the option to test these techniques myself, and thus I can't offer my
perspective. One Astrologer Panicker a nearby partner of late Mr. K. K. Kurup whom I met at
Trichur in 1958, said that the strategy given in the refrain should be acknowledged in inclination

 to the bulky technique clarified in the notes.

Verse 123. The descendants tithi is acquired by deducting the longitude of the offspring Sun
from the longitude of the descendants Moon. If this tithi falls in the brilliant a large portion of,
the issue will be conceived. In the event that it is the dim a large portion of the issue will be
brought into the world in the wake of performing medicinal measures. If the tithi is sooner than
the sixth of dim half, birth of the issue will be postponed. If after the 10th, the occasion will
happen early.
Verse 124. Assuming that the deferral is expected to tithi falling in brilliant half Lord Vishnu
ought to be satisfied. Assuming that the postponement is expected to tithi falling in obscurity half
Lord Siva ought to be adored. On the off chance that the tithi are the seventh, the eighth, the
ninth and the tenth (dull half), then, at that point, an issue will be brought into the world to the
second spouse after the second marriage. Indeed, even after remarriage Brahmins should be
revered and benefited from New Moon days and Sravana days.
Refrain 125. If the santana tithi (or descendants lunar day) turns out to be the eleventh to
fourteenth, the local will have a taken on kid. Assuming that it falls on a New Moon or Full
Moon day, there will be no issue, not so much as a took on youngster. Childlessness will be
because of the disappointment of the Pitris. Functions ought to be performed on parva days to
fulfill the Pitris. The disappointment of the Pitris will be the superb justification for
childlessness.
Verse 126. If santana tithi falls on the sixth lunar day, God Subrahmanya ought to be venerated;
on the fourth, Ganapati ought to be conjured; on the ninth, Durga ought to be loved; on the
twelfth, love the Sun; on the eighth, love Serpent god; on New Moon days, love Pitris.
NOTES
Every one of these are the medicinal measures to be taken on when the santana tithi falls in
obscurity half.
Verse 127. The santhana tithi falling on the fourth, the ninth or the fourteenth lunar day of any
paksha denies the introduction of an issue in view of abhichara. The cure is perusing the Puranas.
If the Santana tithi falls on the fourth lunar day, the cures ought to be finished by posh
individuals; if on the ninth, low class people ought to play out the cures. The reason for
childlessness is a snake god if santana tithi falls in Vishtikarana. On the off chance that it turns
out to be splendid a large portion of, the revile is later; assuming it is dull a large portion of, the
revile is extremely old.
Refrain 128. In the brilliant half, Vishtikarana falls on the fourth (chaturthi), eighth (ashtami),
eleventh (ekadasi) and full Moon; in obscurity half Vishtikarana falls on third (triteeya), seventh
(saptami), tenth (dasami) and fourteenth (chaturdasi). In the event that third and fourth are beset
by Vishtikarana, the difficulty is from agreeable snakes; if the seventh and the eighth are
comparatively beset, the difficulty is from snakes of the second class;
if the tenth and eleventh are correspondingly tormented, the difficulty is from savage snakes; and
assuming the fourteenth and new Moon day are distressed, the difficulty is from extremely awful

 snakes. The cure is the exhibition of Sarpa Bali, particularly for easy going ones. The others
require reflection tunes, moves, and so on put.

Verse 129. So much about santana tithi. There are different utilizations to which this can be

Verse 130. Multiple times the Moon's longitude (at the hour of inquiry) short five times the
longitude of the Sun gives santana tithi. In the event that this alludes to splendid half, birth of an
issue is demonstrated. Till the fifth lunar day the subject of having youngsters is dubious. From
the sixth to the tenth, the odds are good that moderate. From tenth onwards, the outcome is sure.
Verse 131. If the santana tithi falls in obscurity a large portion of, the impacts will be as per the
following: first and second - youngsters will be conceived and no subsequent marriage is
important; third - requires two relationships.; fourth - three relationships; fifth - four
relationships; sixth - five relationships. And, after its all said and done reasonable cures should
be performed.
From the seventh to tenth, the local should play out the healing measures. From the eleventh to
new Moon, the querent will have no issue anything that great activities he might do. In any case,
maybe he might have an issue toward the end by the exceptional power of his Karmas.
NOTES
Allow the Moon to be 8s 15° and the Sun 4s 25° at question time.
Santana tithi = 5 (Moon) - 5 (Sun) = 42S 15° - 25s 5° = 18s 10° or 6s 10° = 190° that is the dim
half.
Since this is the first thithi of the dim half, kids will be conceived.
Verse 132. On the off chance that Santana tithi falls on the seventh of the dim a large portion of,
the querent should embrace a sibling's child; assuming it is the eighth, one needs to take on a
child from his own gotra or variety; in the event that it is the ninth, he should take on two - one
from different families and one more from his own loved ones.
Refrain 133. To the extent that the Santana tithi falls on the tenth or eleventh day of the dull a
large portion of, his replacement will be his sister's child or one took on from an alternate family.
Assuming that it is the twelfth, his property will go to his different family members.
Refrain 134. Assuming it is the thirteenth day the querist's property will pass to sanctuaries.
Assuming it is the fourteenth, it will be appropriated by the rulers. Assuming it is new Moon,
individuals will get his abundance as there will be no inquirers.
Refrain 135. By looking at Santana tithi, great karmas can be suggested all together that men
might have issues. The cures recommended by sages of yesteryear have been given beneath:

Refrain 136. Regardless of whether Santana tithi falls in the brilliant half, Vishti and Rikta are
bad. In the event that it is the fourth day, Ganapati homa is suggested. In the event that it is the

 ninth, love of Durga is compelling; and assuming it is the fourteenth, love of Siva will be helpful.

NOTES
Here the enhancements of Visbti are not given. Subsequently the equivalent might be suggested.
Refrain 137. If Santana tithi falls on a full Moon day, Purusha sukta ought to be presented.
Assuming the Moon is beset, stories in regards to the Moon, her starting point, and so on, ought
to be paid attention to.
Verse 138. Santana Gopala ought to be loved if the Santana tithi falls on the first day of the dull
half. On the off chance that it falls on the second the very first moment should take in
panchagavya and other cured ghees.
Verse 139. On the off chance that it is the third, Goddess Durga ought to be venerated; assuming
it is the fourth Ganapati homa ought to be performed; if fifth, the family divinity ought to be
adored; assuming that it is the sixth God Subrabmanya ought to be conjured; assuming that it is
the seventh, SankaraNarayana ought to be summoned; assuming it is the eighth, the snake god
ought to be loved; and in the event that it is the tenth, 1,000 Brahmins ought to be taken care of.
Verse 140. In the event that Santana tithi falls on the tenth day of the dull half gana homa ought
to be performed; on the eleventh, oblations ought to be presented in sacred spots; on the twelfth,
Brahmins ought to be benefited from the day controlled by the star grouping Sravana. On the
I3th jaya ball ought to be advertised.
Refrain 141. Assuming it is the fourteenth day, Brahmins ought to be benefited from Mondays
and Pitri Bali performed and Pitri Pinda presented in sacred spots.
Verse 142. Assuming that it is new Moon, perform ashtaka sraddha, parvana sraddha and tila
homam. Similar cures hold really great for the first day of the dim half.
Verse 143. We will again figure out specific strategies concerning issues material to both
horoscopy and horary in light of the place of Jupiter.
Verses 144 and 145. Multiple times the amount of the longitudes of the ascendant and
Yamakantaka gives the place of descendants Jupiter (Santana Guru). On the off chance that this
is imperfect by the nine hardships (nava doshas) the individual can't get any issue without plan of
action to easing measures. Under the accompanying circumstances the individual ought to
remarry assuming he wishes to have offspring: (a) if the tithi sphuta - this is acquired by
deducting the Sun's longitude from the longitude of Santana Guru is tormented; (b) in the event
that the Navamsa of Santana Guru ends up falling in Taurus or Libra; or in the sign involved by
Santana Sukra; (c) assuming it is aspected by Santana Sukra; (d) on the off chance that it falls in
the group of stars of Venus.

The quantity of relationships is indicated by the quantity of planets in the seventh house from

 Santana Sukra. To the extent that the sign or the Navamsa involved by Santana Sukra is solid the
local gets an issue from the first or the second spouse.
NOTES
Santana Sukra (or offspring Venus) is acquired by duplicating the longitude of Venus (upon
entering the world or at question time) by 5. Model:
Leave the Sun alone in Cancer 23°; Ascendant - Aquarius 14°; Yamakantaka - Gemini 15°;
Jupiter - Scorpio 14°; and Venus - Leo 4°. Assurance of Santana Guru:
Yamakantaka + Ascendant = 2s 15° + 10s 14° - 12s 29° Santana Guru (S.G.) = 12s 29° x 5 - 64s
25° = Leo 25°.
If the S.G. is distressed by any of the 9 flaws (nava doshas), healing measures ought to be
embraced to get issues. Assurance of Tithi Sphuta:

Tithi Sphuta - Santana Guru - Sun = 4s 25° - 3s 23° Tithi Sphuta - 1s 2° or Taurus 2°
The tithi (lunar day) relating to this is 32/12 = 2 8/12 = the third or tritheeya. In the event that
this is beset, the local is exhorted remarry to get an issue.
Assurance of Santana Sukra: Example: Santana Sukra - Venus x 5
-

Leo 4° x 5

-

4s 4° x 5 = 20s 20° Santhana Sukra 8s 20° or Sagittarius 20°.

(a) The Navamsa of Santana Guru is Scorpio (the eighth Navamsa in Leo) and not that of
Taurus or Libra. Thus there is no dosha.
(b) Santana Guru (Leo 25°) doesn't fall in the Rasi of Santana Sukra (Sagittarius 20°). Along
these lines there is no dosha.
(c)

Santana Guru is in Pubba administered by Venus. Consequently the dosha exists.

Adjusting the doshas or flaws one needs to foresee whether or not the local would get a kid from
the (first) spouse.
IV (a) The quantity of relationships is known by the quantity of planets in the seventh from
Santana Sukra (Sagittarius 20°). In the model being referred to, there is no planet in the seventh
from Santhana Sukra.
(b) The Rasi of Santana Sukra is Sagittarius; the Navamsa is that of Libra. The Rasi is more
grounded. Thusly we can say that the local will have an issue from the first spouse.
Here it should be noticed that these mysterious standards were advanced when there were no
legitimate limitations on the quantity of relationships a male could have. Be that as it may, today
a Hindu can't wed a second time when the first spouse is alive or isn't separated, while specific
areas of non-Hindus are allowed to have quite a few wives.
In this way the right utilization of these two verses relies on the current social conditions and the

 legitimate variables put in the method of the greater part populace of this country.
Refrain 146. Assuming Santana Sukra ends up falling in an eunuch Navamsa or eunuch planets
viewpoint this Navamsa, the local should wed a third an ideal opportunity to get a youngster.

NOTES
Eunuch Navamsas are Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn and Aquarius. Eunuch planets are Mercury and
Saturn.

Verse 147. The amount of Santana Guru and Yamakantaka duplicated by 9 gives Santana yoga
sphuta. From this can be learned the quantity of youngsters.
Verse 148. The lapsed piece of Santana yoga sphuta demonstrates the quantity of kids. In the
event that it is 5 degrees, the local will have one issue; assuming it is 10 degrees, two; assuming
it is 15 degrees, 3, etc. At the point when three vargas of Santana yoga sphuta is constrained by
Jupiter, one will have in excess of six children.
NOTES
Our creator acquires one more technique to anticipate the quantity of issues one will have. In the
illumination of the way that today the introduction of kids can be forestalled by a wide range of
anti-conception medication techniques, one ought to adjust these standards to the current day
social climate. Obviously, as in a few western nations, a day might come when rate of birth
might go down so much that we might return to the circumstances existing before these family
arranging techniques were presented. Assurance of Santhana Yoga Sphuta:
Santhana Guru + Yamakantaka
= Leo 25° + Gemini 15° = 4s 25° + 2s 15°
= 7s 10°
Santhana Yoga Sphuta = 7s 10° x 9
= 63s 90° = 66s = Virgo 30°
At the pace of 5° per issue, the quantity of youngsters will be 6. Shadvarga masters for Virgo 30°
are as per the following:

Rasi Hora Drekkana
Mercury

Navamsa

Dwadasamsa

Sun Venus Mercury

Sun Mars

Trimsamsa

Jupiter vargas don't figure by any stretch of the imagination. In this manner the essential of
Jupiter controlling the three vargas in the Santana yoga sphuta doesn't make a difference here.

 In the event that the vargas of Jupiter surpass three, there will be in excess of 6 children.

Verse 149. Take the Drekkana ruler of Santana yoga sphuta. Whenever he is weakened or in a
threatening sign, loss of kids ought to be anticipated in the accompanying way: If the terminated
piece of the longitude of this ruler in the Rasi is 5 degrees, the oldest child will pass on;
assuming it is 10 degrees, the second child will bite the dust; along these lines, ascertain till the
finish of the sign.
In the event that the Navamsa of Yoga Sphuta is Taurus, Leo, Virgo to Scorpio, the local won't
have any youngsters.
NOTES
The refrain is easy to comprehend. Similarly as the master of the Drekkana is taken, the Santana
yoga sphuta may likewise be taken.
Verse 150. In the event that in the Santhana yoga sphuta, three vargas are held by Mercury and
Saturn there will be birth of twins. Assuming that these planets are feeble, the twins will pass on.
Verse 151. The amount of the longitudes of Mercury, Saturn and the ruler of the fifth increased
by 5, gives Datta Sphuta. If this involves a sun based sign and a lunar Navamsa and is related
with or aspected by malefics, a kid will be taken on. If the above sphuta remains in a lunar Rasi
and a sun oriented Navamsa, then, at that point, no kid will be taken on.
Refrain 152. Assuming the Datta Sphuta is distressed by nava doshas, the individual will have
no children, not took on ones.
Verse 153. Whenever Jupiter travels the Santana Jeeva Sphuta sign and its thirds, the kid will be
conceived. Yet, this will happen just when Gulika involves the primary portion of the zodiac. At
the point when Gulika possesses the second a large portion of, the issue will be conceived when
Jupiter navigates the Navamsa Rasi of Santhana Jeeva and its thirds.
Discover the Navamsa of the amount of the Gulika Sphuta and Yamakantaka.
To the extent that this Navamsa is odd or even the issue is a male or female.
Verse 154. The Navamsa Rasi of the Yoga Sphuta is significant in deciding the sex of the
youngster. Proportionately as it is odd or even, the issue will be a male or a female.
Verse 155. Include the Santana Guru Sphuta, Yamakantaka and Santana Gulika. Duplicate the
complete by 81. Discover the Nakshatra of the subsequent figure. The introduction of the
youngster happens when this Nakshatra or its thirds is traveled by the Moon.

NOTES
Santana Gulika is acquired by increasing Gulika by 5.
Verse 156. In this part, the subject of 'issues' is clarified in numerous ways. At the point when it
is observed that one will have no issue or the issue will bite the dust, appropriate healing

 measures as got from Santana Tithi ought to be taken on. Appropriate counsel should be given in
the event that the reception of a child or birth of a child by a subsequent marriage is shown.
Refrain 157. Assuming the introduction of a child is shown, the hour of birth ought to be fixed
by noticing the travel places of Jupiter, Saturn, the Sun or the Moon. Assuming the question
concerns a pregnant lady the sex of the issue likewise ought to be most certainly anticipated.
Verse 158. I have depicted above "Santhana Prasna" exhaustively putting together it with respect
to the compositions of old sages so the inquiry might be plainly drawn nearer in as numerous
ways as could be expected.

Issues According to Birth Horoscope

Refrain 1. Presently we will portray how the insights about offspring - their numoer, their
season of birth, and so on, and on the off chance that there are no issues why it is thus, and so
forth, can be perused from horoscopy.
NOTES
This section manages strategies to estimate insights concerning kids on horoscopy.
The past section has given strategies in view of Prasna.
Refrain 2. Assuming that the Moon possesses an anupachaya sign in the spouse's horoscope and
is aspected by any one planet, she will deliver a kid. On the off chance that the Moon involves an
upachaya sign and is aspected by solid benefic planets, she will have kids, gave therapeutic
measures are performed. In the spouse's horoscope, the Moon in an upachaya sign related with
great planets demonstrates youngsters. In the event that the Moon is in an anupachaya sign with
a part of a planet, a kid will be conceived solely after the due execution of cures. If, be that as it
may, in the spouse's graph the Moon is in anupachaya and in the husband's diagram the Moon is
without benefic viewpoints, there will be no issue.
Verse 3. There will be no issue in the event that there is no strength for kshetra (in the female
horoscope) and beeja (in the male horoscope). Consequently an assessment of these is vital.
Refrain 4. The solidarity to impregnate is contributed by the Sun, while Venus administers
semen. Assuming these two possess odd signs and odd Navamsas and are solid, the male has
"beeja strength" and he is fit for impregnating ladies. In a ladies' horoscope, Mars administers the
idea of blood and the Moon controls the ability to bear youngsters. On the off chance that these
two involve even signs and even Navamsas, the female has the kshetra solidarity to deliver
issues.

NOTES
In the event that Mars and the Moon are not solid, the lady won't bear youngsters. Assuming
there are a few decent characteristics and frail characteristics for these planets, kids will be

 conceived solely after the essential medicinal measures.
Refrain 5. Partition the terminated piece of the asterism involved by Jupiter in ghatis and
vighatis by 5 and note down the subsequent signs, and so on
Comparatively treat the lapsed piece of the asterism involved by the Sun and Venus. Every one
of these three included give Beeja Sphuta. Similarly manage the terminated piece of the
asterisms involved by Mars and the Moon. To these add the outcome got from the asterism
involved by Jupiter, Kshetra Sphuta is acquired.

NOTES
The normal time taken by the Moon to go through an asterisin (13° 20' or 200') is around 60
ghatikas, and that implies the time required is around 4.5 ghatis per level of longitude. This
speed is to be utilized by the creator in computation of Beeja Sphuta and Kshetra Sphuta.
Assume Jupiter is in 12° 2' of Scorpio, and that implies he takes care of 8° 42' in the heavenly
body of Anuradha. The comparable in ghatis for this is 8°.7 x 4.5 = 39.15 ghatis. In this manner
the terminated part of the asterism where Jupiter is put is ghatis 39.15.
Separating this by 5, we get (39.15/5) = 7.83 or 7s 24°.9
= Scorpio 24°.9 as the Beeja longitude of Jupiter.. Comparably compute for different planets and
discover the Beeja and Kshetra Sphutas. It will be seen that in a male horoscope Jupiter, the Sun
and Venus are involved while in the female horoscope Jupiter, Mars and the Moon are involved.
Verse 6. On the off chance that Beeja Sphuta possesses an odd sign and an odd Navamsa and is
aspected by or related with benefics, it is considered as solid. If in any case, it is feeble.
Refrain 7. Assuming that Kshetra Sphuta involves an even sign and an even Navamsa and is
aspected by or related with benefics, it is solid. If in any case, it is frail.
Refrain 8. Assuming that the vargas involved by these two are possessed by benefic planets,
they are great; whenever claimed by malefics, they are terrible. In the event that Rahu angles or
connects with Kshetra Sphuta, childlessness or loss of kids will be because of the fierceness of
the snake god. The angle or relationship of Gulika achieves inconvenience from Pretas. Saturn
demonstrates sins submitted in previous existence. Mars shows inconvenience from foes or
divinities like Bhairava or Chamundi.
Refrain 9. Beeja Sphuta should be determined in the horoscope of a male. Kshetra Sphuta ought
to be worked out in a female's horoscope. In horary, both Beeja Sphuta and Kshetra Sphuta ought
to be worked out. In fixing time, every one of these four Sphutas should be utilized.
Verse 10. We have given one technique for computing Beeja and Kshetra Sphutas. There are
different techniques additionally given here, only for affirmation got by arrangement of various
perspectives.
Refrain 11. In the male's horoscope, Beeja Sphuta is the amount of the longitudes of the Sun,
Venus and Jupiter. In the female's horoscope, the Kshetra Sphuta is the amount of the longitudes
of the Moon, Mars and Jupiter. Assuming Beeja and Kshetra possess odd signs and Navamsas

 and even signs and Navamsas individually, they are supposed to be solid. If malefics or impartial
planets join or perspective the equivalent, the strength of these is decreased. Once more, malefic
planets in the fifth from Beeja and in the ninth from Kshetra render them feeble. Nonpartisan
planets debilitate the Beeja and Kshetra, while benefic planets reinforce them.
NOTES
Here in this section, "Parasu" signifies, ninth house from Kshetra. The worked "te" (*) alludes to
malefic planets. "Athra" signifies the viewpoint or relationship of Beeja and Kshetra Sphutas.
Mercury is impartial and not to be incorporated among benefic planets.
Verse 12. Note the lapsed piece in Ghatis of the asterisms involved by Beeja and Kshetra.
Partition the Ghatis and vighatis by 5. The longitudes so acquired are two sphutas called Beeja
Sphuta and Kshetra Sphuta. This is from certain perspectives (Pakshantara).
NOTES
In this association reference might be made to notes under verse 5.
Verse 13. Decide the Pakshantara Sphutas and judge their solidarity by applying similar
principles as in the past. Panchaka is to be worked. Assuming this Sphuta possesses the first,
fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth houses, youngsters will be brought into the world during the
initial segment of his life. Assuming it involves the second, eighth or eleventh, he will have kids
during the center piece of his life. Assuming that it involves third, sixth and twelfth, youngsters
will be brought into the world during the last part.
Refrain 14. Assuming these are to some extent solid yet aspected by benefics, the local will have
youngsters in the wake of playing out the vital Prayaschittas (healing measures).
Verse 15. The shortcoming of Beeja and Kshetra is because of two reasons, viz., (1) inward and
normal and (2) outside. Inward shortcoming is because of the separation of the three humors
vatha, pitha and sleshma. The solution for this is clinical treatment and the presentation of other
therapeutic measures. As these are because of sins submitted in past births, these cures, viz., japa
and daana other than clinical treatment whenever done appropriately, will eliminate the
insidiousness and kids will be conceived. This is the assessment of antiquated Seers.
Verse 16. Assuming that the difficulty is outer, it is because of the secret assault of rakshasas,
yakshas and paisachas or the imperceptible impact of the scourges of Brahmins or Devas.
Having discovered the wellspring of the difficulty, the imperative 'karmas' or customs ought to
be performed.
Verse 17. The subject of issues can likewise be considered by an assessment of Santana Graha
Sphuta.

NOTES
How they are to be turned out is given beneath.
Verse 18. Duplicating the longitudes of planets by 5 we get Santana Graha Sphutas. All out the
sphutas of Santana Sun, Santana Moon and Santhana Jupiter and the outcome is Santana

 Trisphuta. Assuming this Thrisphuta falls in the third or fifth or seventh asterism from the birth
star of the local, or the 88th or the 108th quarter from the extreme Moon or the sixth or the
eighth or the twelfth house from the ascendant, there will be no issue. Look at the horoscopes of
the spouse and the wife. In the event that this yoga is found, there will be no issues. If, in any
case, this yoga gets in one of the horoscopes, the introduction of an issue is conceivable by
appropriate therapeutic measures.
Refrain 19. Assuming Trisphuta falls in the third, fifth or seventh asterism from the birth star or
88th or 108th quarter from the extreme Moon and on the off chance that this asterism turns out to
be a male one, the male issue will pass on. Assuming that it is a female star, the female issue will
kick the bucket. Assuming that Santhana Mars and Santhana Saturn fall in th e same Trisphuta,
no issue will be conceived.
NOTES
The 88th or 108th quarter from the extreme Moon give comparable outcomes.
Refrains 20 and 21. To the extent that the Santhana Sun or the Santhana Moon or both involve a
kendra from the Thrisphuta, an issue will be brought into the world to the first spouse, or the
second wife assuming he remarries, or to the main wife after second marriage. Jupiter or Venus
in a comparative circumstance means separately that the local will wed a third and a fourth
spouse to both of whom issues will be conceived. The shortfall of issue will be because of the
scourge of Pitrus or snakes proportionately as Saturn or Rahu possesses the fifth, seventh or
ninth from Trisphuta.
Therapeutic measures should be recommended based on the asterism of the Trisphuta. Assuming
it falls inside the eighth asterism from Venus, Durga ought to be loved. In the event that it falls
inside the four from Rohini, Gana Homa ought to be endorsed. In the event that inside seven
heavenly bodies from Pushya, Sarpa Bali ought to be recommended. Also assuming that the
Trisphuta falls inside 8 stars from Swati taking care of Brahmins should be done on days
controlled by the heavenly body of Sravana.

NOTES
These two refrains are a piece befuddling. Anyway as I have perceived them after meeting with a
learned Panikkar, coming up next are to be noted.
We have as of now figured out how to show up at Santana Trisphuta (or Trisphuta as alluded to
in these two refrains). This is gotten by totalling multiple times the longitudes of the Sun, the
Moon and Jupiter. (1) If this Thrisphuta star is the third, fifth or seventh from birth star; or then
again assuming it ends up falling in the 88th or 108th quarter from the extreme Moon's position,
the issue will pass on. The sex of the issue will be as indicated by the manly or female nature of
the Thrisphuta star.
The introduction of kids is again delivered conceivable by wedding upto 4 spouses which in the
current social set-up is unimaginable. Consequently in the use of different mixes one should
utilize one's expertise and interpretative capacity.

 Refrain 22. The accompanying mixes demonstrate annihilation of family: (1) Malefics involving
the fourth; Venus in the seventh and the Moon in the tenth; (2) all malefics set in the

first, fifth, eighth and twelfth houses; (3) all malefics involving the fourth, Mercury and Venus in
the seventh and Jupiter in the fifth.
Verse 23. It is said in Sarvartha Chintamani that assuming a shrewd planet possesses the
ascendant, the Moon is in the fourth and the ruler of the ascendant is in the fifth and the master
of the fifth is feeble, the family will be doused.
Refrain 24. Assuming malefics are in the twelfth, fifth and eighth from the ascendant; on the off
chance that Jupiter and the Moon involve the ascendant; if either Mars or Saturn is in the
seventh; if all the malefics possess the fourth; the Moon is in the fifth; and malefics involve the
first, fourth and twelfth houses, the family eradication happens.
NOTES
Four mixes are recorded in this refrain. For family elimination one of these mixes should be
available.
Verse 25. The family becomes wiped out assuming the fifth house is aspected by malefics and is
without benefic angle; the complete number of bindus in the fifth house doesn't surpass 25 in
Sarvashtakavarga; the fifth house turns out to be an even sign; the ruler of the asterism of Jupiter
involves the fifth house.
NOTES
Four blends are recorded in this verse for the annihilation of one's loved ones.
(1)

Malefics perspective the fifth house, without benefics;

(2)

total number of bindus in the fifth house in the Sarvashtakavarga isn't more than 25;

(3)

the fifth house is an even sign; and

(4)

the ruler of the star grouping in which Jupiter is put is in the fifth house.

Verse 26. In the last verse, a few mixes have been nitty gritty. If by some stroke of good luck
one blend is available, the shortfall of issue is because of stomach protest; if two, the difficulty is
expected toievil powers; if three, it is the consequence of these two causes. Consequently
medicinal measures, whenever done appropriately, can give issues. On the off chance that every
one of the yogas are found, the local will have no issue.
Refrain 27. Under the accompanying three mixes, there will be no birth of issues:
(1) ruler of the ascendant, master of the fifth, Jupiter and ruler of the seventh are on the whole
exceptionally frail; (2) rulers of the fifth from the ascendant, the Moon and Jupiter are for the
most part without benefic perspectives,
(3)

the fifth house has no benefic perspectives except for is vigorously distressed.

Refrain 28. The fifth house is involved by malefics; the master of the fifth is incapacitated and

 unaspected by benefics; or Mars possesses the seventh; the Moon and Venus consolidate. These
mixes show nonattendance of kids.
Refrain 29. Assuming the winding down Moon involves the fifth and malefics are placed in the
first, seventh and twelfth, the local will have neither spouse nor youngsters.

Refrain 30. In the event that the rulers of the ascendaat and the Moon-sign, Jupiter, the fifth
house, the seventh house are incredibly feeble; these and 'Yama-kantaka' possess the sixth,
eighth or twelfth; the fifth house is aspected by or related with malefics; assuming the eunuch
mixes are available; assuming that Santana Thithi falls after the eighth day of the dim portion of
the Moon; if in Jupiter Ashtavarga the fifth house from Jupiter has few bindus, the local will be
issueless. He won't have an embraced child.
NOTES
Verses 27 to 30 diagram mixes where birth of offspring is precluded. These are:
1.

If the Ascendant master, fifth ruler, Jupiter and seventh master are for the most part frail.

2.
If the separate fifth masters from the Ascendant, the Moon and Jupiter get no benefic
perspectives.
3.

The fifth house has no benefic angles except for is burdened malefics.

4.

The fifth house is rented by malefics.

5.

The fifth master is incapacitated and isn't aspected by any benefics.

6.

Mars is in the seventh.

7.

The Moon and Venus are together (this blend appears to be equivocal).

8.
The winding down Moon involves the fifth and malefics are in the first, seventh and
twelfth. This blend precludes issues as well as a spouse.
9.

The Ascendant master, the Moon-sign ruler, Jupiter, the fifth and seventh houses are very

feeble.
10.

The variables surrendered (9) or more Yamakantaka possess the sixth, eighth or twelfth.

11.

The fifth house is aspected by or related with malefics.

12.

Eunuch mixes are available.

Perusers are alluded to the Notes under Chapter XVIII refrain 146.
13.

Santana Tithi falls after the eighth day of the dull portion of the fortnight.

14: The fifth house from Jupiter in Jupiter Ashtakavarga has few bindus. In mixes 9 to 14, even a
took on youngster is precluded.
Essentially a couple of these blends will undoubtedly show up in the outlines of childless

 couples.
Allow us to see which of the mixes recorded above are found in this diagram.
Blend (7) Lagna ruler Mars however in the eleventh is with Ketu stitched in the middle malefics;
fifth master Jupiter is in weakness with no benefic perspectives, karaka Jupiter likewise is frail
without benefic viewpoint. The seventh master Venus likewise is in an antagonistic sign with
next to no great viewpoint.
Mix (2) is part of the way present as Jupiter who is the fifth master from both the Lagna and the
Moon and Venus (the fifth ruler from Jupiter) get no benefic perspectives.

The outline above is of a childless. local.
Mix (3) additionally holds great as the fifth is involved by Rahu with no benefic viewpoints.
Mix (4) and (5) additionally apply here. Mix (7) applies yet its rationale isn't exceptionally clear.
Countless these mixes showing up in the outline clarify the shortfall of descendants.
Refrain 31. Assuming the masters of the ascendant and the Moon sign are solid; when they,
Jupiter, and the fifth and seventh houses and Yamakantaka are well arranged; when the fifth
house is very much arranged; when the fifth house in Jupiter Ashtaka-varga has a lot of bindus,
when Santana Tithi falls in the brilliant half, birth of kids is demonstrated.
Refrain 32. Assuming the blends given above are viewed as blended, kids can be had by
reasonable therapeutic measures.
Refrain 33. In. horoscopy additionally Santana Tithi can be investigated and the possibilities for
youngsters found out. Such is the perspective on the diviners. Henceforth the way that it is to be
done is clarified.
Refrain 34. It is to be accepted that at the crack of dawn every day the (nonexistent) Sun and the
(fanciful) Moon are set toward the finish of Aries and the center of Sagittarius separately. The
Sun is attempted to move in reverse and the Moon advances at the pace of 50 vighatis in each
sign.
Refrain 35. Increase the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon determined by the above strategy
by 5 and the places of Santana Sun and the Santana Moon are acquired. Then, at that point, the
Santana Tithi is to be gotten by deducting the Santana Sun from the

Santhana Moon. On the off chance that the tithi falls in the splendid a large portion of, the
introduction of a kid is inclined toward.
NOTES
Assurance of Santana Sun and Santana Moon: Method:
35 gh 40 vgh = 2140 vighatis after dawn.

 (a)

Divide the hour of birth (in ghatis from dawn) by 50.

(b)

Quotient - x.

(c)

Expunge products of 12 from x to get y.

(d)

13 signs - y = Sun.

(e)

Sun x 5 = Santana Sun

(f)

y + 8 signs 15 degrees = Moon

(g)

Moon x 5 = Santana Moon

(h) Santana Moon - Santana Sun = Santana tithi Example: Time of birth or of inquiry = 35-40
ghatis from dawn.
35 gh 40 vgh = 2140 vighatis after dawn. (a) 2140/50 = 42 40/50 (b) x = 42 signs 24°.
Erasing products of 12 from x, we get
(c)

y = 6 signs 24° in the wake of erasing mujtiples of 12.

(d)

13 signs - 6 sign 24° = Sun, i.e., Sun = 6 signs 6 degrees.

(e)

Santana Sun = Sun x 5 = 6 signs 6° x 5 = 30 signs 30 degrees

= 6 signs 30 degrees = Libra 30 degrees
(f)
6 signs 24° + 8 signs 15° = Moon, i.e., Moon = 15s 9° 3s 9° (g) Santana Moon = Moon x 5
= 3s 9° x 15
= 4s 15" = Leo 15°. (A) Santana tithi = Leo 15° - Libra 30° = 135°-210°
= 285° or Santana thithi will be the 24th tithi or ninth day of the dull half.
Refrain 36. If the Santana tithi falls in obscurity half of the lunar month no issue will be
conceived except for a child will be embraced. This guideline is appropriate both to birth and
horary diagrams.
Verse 37. On the off chance that the fading Moon is in the ascendant, Jupiter combust, involves
an indication of Saturn and malefics are in thirds, the dad of the issue will bite the dust before it
is conceived. The kid bom will live lengthy and cheerful. On the off chance that Mercury
possesses the fifth alongside a malefic and if a malefic involves the eleventh, or the fifth, or first
or the fourth, the dad might live just to see the introduction of the kid.
NOTES
Clearly the dad won't live lengthy.
Verse 38. (a) Mars in the ascendant, the Moon in the eighth and the Sun in the issueless signs;
(b) Jupiter in the eighth, Mars in the twelfth, Saturn in the ascendant and an issueless sign turns
out to be the fifth house; (c) malefics in the fifth house from Jupiter, numerous planets in the
ascendant and the Moon in the twelfth. The over three mixes show birth of issues in advanced
age.

 NOTES
The issueless or alpatmaja signs are Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio.
Refrain 39. The melting away Moon in the ascendant, malefics in the ascendant or the fourth
house, planets other than benefics in thirds show the after death birth of the kid.
Refrain 40. At the point when a malefic possesses the fifth house which isn't his own sign, and
which has no part of solid benefics, the kid will pass on. At the point when the planet possessing
the fifth is likewise the proprietor of the eighth, kids will bite the dust. Assuming Mars is in the
fifth, every one of the kids will bite the dust as they are conceived. On the off chance that Jupiter
angles Mars, just the primary conceived will pass on If Pisces turns out to be the fifth and is
involved by Jupiter and aspected by Saturn then additionally youngsters will kick the bucket.
NOTES
A malefic should possess the fifth house, which ought not be the malefic's own sign. It ought not
get the part of solid benefics. Under this mix kids will bite the dust. Assuming the planet
possessing the fifth and eighth is in the fifth, there will be loss of youngsters. The place of Mars
in the fifth blessings the demise of kids as they are conceived. Assuming Mars gets the part of
Jupiter the principal issue will get by. Youngsters will kick the bucket in the event that Pisces
turns out to be the fifth involved by Jupiter and aspected by Saturn.
Refrain 41. At the point when the master of the fifth is in a malefic Navamsa, incapacitated and
combust and aspected by malefics or possesses dusthanas then loss of kids ought to be
anticipated.
Noticed The dusthanas are the sixth, eighth and twelfth houses.
Verse 42. In the event that the ruler of the Drekkana involved by the master of the Navamsa
involved by the ruler of the twelfth partners or viewpoints the fifth house or its master, then, at
that point, kids will kick the bucket.
NOTES
The mix is to some degree indirect (a) Take the ruler of the twelfth; (b) see which Navamsa he
possesses; (c) discover the Drekkana wherein this Navamsa master (according to b) is set. This
Drekkana ruler ought not viewpoint or partner with the fifth or the fifth master. For instance
Aquarius is the ascendant and the twelfth ruler Saturn is in Taurus Navamsa. Say the ruler of this
Navamsa, viz., Venus involves the Drekkana of Aries. Then, at that point, assuming the ruler of
this Drekkana sign, viz., Mars ought to have a say in the fifth house or the fifth master, then, at
that point, the youngsters will bite the dust.

Verse 43. Whenever the ruler of the fifth is combust and possesses horrible Shashtiamsas joined
or aspected by malefics, then, at that point, additionally passing of youngsters ought to be
anticipated.
Refrain 44. If the fifth from Santana Lagna, and Santhana Guru, end up being claimed by Saturn
and Mercury or they are related with or aspected by Saturn, Mercury and the Moon, then, at that

 point, the local should take on a kid. On the off chance that the master of the fifth is additionally
solid, the man will have an issue brought into the world to him after his reception of a youngster.
Santana Lagna is acquired by duplicating the longitude of the birth ascendant by 5.
NOTES
From certain perspectives, the fifth house from the birth ascendant and the extreme Jupiter ought
to likewise be thought of.
Verse 45. Whenever the ruler of the fifth involves the Navamsa of Saturn and is conjoined with
Mercury and Saturn, the local will take on a kid. Whenever the ruler of the fifth is in the
Navamsa of Saturn and Jupiter and Venus are in their own signs, then, at that point, the
individual will have a kid brought into the world to his. spouse after the issue has been taken on.
On the off chance that the fifth house from Jupiter in the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter has focuses
contributed via planets possessing the sign or Navamsa of Saturn, then, at that point, additionally
reception ought to be anticipated.
Refrain 46. A solid benefic in the fifth house, except if aspected by the master of the fifth, can
give an embraced issue.
Some Visesha Yogas of Putrasthana
Refrain 47. At the point when Saturn is in the fifth which turns out to be Cancer, birth of
children is demonstrated. At the point when the Sun, Mars and Venus are correspondingly
positioned, the child will be brought into the world to the subsequent spouse. Whenever the
Moon and Jupiter possess the fifth, just female youngsters are conceived. There is just a weak
opportunity assuming Mercury is in the fifth.
NOTES
The refrain thinks about the aftereffects of various planets involving the fifth house which ought
to turn out to be Cancer. On the off chance that (a) Saturn is in the fifth, there is chance of getting
an issue; (6) the Sun, Mars and Venus - birth of kids to second spouse; (c) the Moon and Jupiter just female issues; and (d) Mercury alone - minimal possibility getting a youngster. As to (d) and
(c) some think that the female youngsters will dwarf male issues. As indicated by some pandits,
Cancer turning out to be the fifth house applies just to Saturn and Mercury. For different planets,
the fifth house can be any sign.

Verse 48. In the event that a malefic possesses the fifth which ought to be his own sign, the local
will get numerous youngsters, however they may not make due. However, benefics so arranged
will give turn around results. Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio turning out to be the fifth house
give not many youngsters. On the off chance that the Moon possesses these, again there will be
no issue. Assuming the Moon possesses the fourth or fifth house which ought to be Virgo,
female issues will be conceived.
NOTES
Regardless of whether the fifth house turns out to be his own, a malefic there shows demise of

 kids. On the off chance that benefics involve the fifth turning out to be their own signs it
demonstrates various youngsters. Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio are supposed to be alpaputra
rasis. Whenever any of these end up being the fifth, not many youngsters are conceived. The
Moon in the fifth in one of these signs denies youngsters. In the event that Virgo is the fourth or
fifth house and the Moon is arranged there, birth of girls is demonstrated.
Refrain 49. At the point when the Moon involves an odd sign and an odd Navamsa aspected by
the Sun, there will be issues. On the off chance that the master of the seventh involves the fifth,
both the spouse and youngsters will get demolished. If the solid ruler of the seventh is in the fifth
and the master of the eighth is in the seventh, there will be issues. Additionally, assuming the
masters of the first and the fifth trade places, there will be issue; however on the off chance that
the ruler of the first is Mercury, there will be no issue.
Verse 50. Whenever the principal house is in an even sign, having the vargas of the Moon and
Venus and has the part of these two planets, the kids will be female ones.
Refrain 51. At the point when the fifth house is an odd sign and the ruler of the fifth is in an odd
Navamsa, then, at that point, every one of the issues will be guys.
Refrain 52. At the point when the fifth house is an even sign and the master of the fifth is in an
even Navamsa, then, at that point, the issue is a female. Whenever the fifth house is an even sign
and the ruler of the fifth is in an eunuch sign, the youngster will be an eunuch.
NOTES
Eunuch signs are Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn and Aquarius.
Refrain 53. Assuming an even planet possesses his own sign in the fifth, many issues will be
conceived. On the off chance that there are two detestable planets in the fifth, numerous kids will
be conceived.
Verse 54. On the off chance that the ruler of the second is in the fifth aspected by Jupiter and is
solid, then, at that point, issues will be conceived.
Refrain 55. If the masters of the ascendant and the fifth involve quadrants in relationship with
benefics and the ruler of the second is solid, birth of issues can be anticipated.
Verse 56. In the event that the ruler of the Navamsa involved by the master of the fifth is a
benefic or is related with or aspected by a benefic, youngsters will be conceived.
Verse 57. Whenever the fifth house from the ascendant or the Moon is solid and is related with
or aspected by benefics or master of the fifth is with no hardship, there will be early birth of kids.
Refrain 58. At the point when the master of the fifth and Jupiter are solid, not related with the
rulers of the sixth, eighth or twelfth, and so on, liberated from burning, and Duritamsa, birth of
youngsters can be anticipated.

NOTES

 The second and the third padas of Samhara Nakshalras make up Duritamsa.
Refrain 59. At the point when Mars involves the fifth indistinguishable with Aries, Leo, Scorpio
or Pisces and is aspec-ted by Jupiter, birth of an issue can be anticipated.
Refrain 60. At the point when the master of the fifth, Jupiter, the Sun and Mars possess odd
Navamsas in odd signs, male kids will be conceived. In the event that the Moon, Venus and the
master of the fifth possess even ones, the issues will be females.
Refrain 61. Assuming that the fifth house and its master are solid, the youngsters will be
seemingly perpetual. Assuming the house is possessed by a malefic, the children will be corrupt.
Assuming that it is odd, youngsters will be brutal. If the ruler of the fifth turning out to be a
benefic, and Jupiter involve their places of commendation and own benefic vargas, the kids
conceived will be refined, seemingly perpetual and prosperous.
Verse 62. The overall condition of youngsters will rely on the psychological mentality of the
guardians at the hour of impregnation. In the event that they are cheerful and liberated from
tensions, youngsters will likewise have a blissful existence. On the off chance that at the hour of
impregnation, breath surges out of the nostrils of the dad, the youngster will have a long life. In
the event that there is no breath, the kid will have short life as it were.
Verse 63. If the ruler of the fifth and Jupiter are conjoined with or aspected by malefics, the
youngsters will either be disfigured or wiped out.
Verse 64. The rulers of the first and the fifth commonly exchange houses; these two rulers
partner with one another, and viewpoint each other; these three blends show the introduction of
kids. In a femeale horoscope, 'conveyance' must be determined from the fifth, and the youngsters
from the ninth. Assuming the fourth house in a female's horoscope is related by a benefic, there
will be no conveyance.
Refrain 65. Assuming that the longitudes of Jupiter and the fifth house fall in Jupiter's varga and
the fifth is aspected by Jupiter, then, at that point, one will have youngsters from his own
significant other. The fifth house can be counted both from the ascendant and the Moon.
Refrain 66. Assuming the masters of the ascendant and the fifth house are common companions,
father and child will be all around arranged towards one another. Assuming they are foes, father
and child will be sick together arranged. Also assuming these masters are impartial, the
relationship will be apathetic.
Refrain 67. On the off chance that the masters of the ascendant and the fifth angle one another
or trade their homes, then, at that point, the child will serve his dad obediently.
Verse 68. On the off chance that the ruler of the fifth involves or perspectives Lagna, or the
master of the ascendant possesses or viewpoints the fifth house, then, at that point, additionally
the child will be submissive to his dad.
Verse 69. In the event that the master of the fifth, Mars and Rahu perspective the fifth house
from the Moon or the ascendant, then, at that point, the child will constantly be manhandling his
dad.
Verse 70. Whenever the ruler of the Navamsa involved by the master of the fifth is in the

 ascendant, the master of the Navamsa involved by the master of the ascendant is in the fifth, and
the ruler of the Navamsa involved by Jupiter is in a kendra, Sages pronounce that the local will
have youngsters.

From Anushtana Paddhati
Verse 71. Whenever the fifth house is either claimed by benefics or related with or aspected by
them, there will be issues. If not, there will be no issues.
Refrain 72. When benefics involve the fifth house from the ascendant or the Moon or Jupiter,
the dad will be significantly benefited by the child.
Verse 73. The item acquired by increasing the longitude of the fifth house (without sign), as far
as minutes by the quantum of angle (as far as Shashtiamsas) is to be separated by 200. The
remainder demonstrates the quantity of youngsters. The longitude of the fifth house (without
sign) decreased to minutes is duplicated by the perspective quantum of malefics. The item is
partitioned by 200. The remainder shows the quantity of issues that bite the dust.
NOTES
In giving a clarification of this verse, I should present that I have not had the option to come by
any agreeable outcomes in the utilization of this refrain to reasonable horoscopes. The dristhi
shashtyamsas are the aggregate angle cast on a house by every one of the planets. The strategy
for working out this has been clarified exhaustively with models in my book Graha and Bhava
Balas.
Convert the longitude of the fifth house (dismissing the sign) into minutes. Call this x. Take the
drishti shashtyamsa or quantum of angle on the fifth house. Call this y. Increase x by y and call
the item z. Partition z by 200. The remainder shows the quantity of issues to be conceived. The
quantum of benefic perspective indicates the quantity of enduring issues while the quantum of
malefic angles means the quantity of issues that kick the bucket. Some pandits are of the
assessment that z should initially be partitioned by 60 and the remainder again separated by 200.
I can't vouchsafe for the working of this hypothesis.

Verse 74. The finished number of Navamsas of the ruler of the fifth gives the quantity of
youngsters. Male issues are to be determined from the Navamsas of male planets and female
issues from female planets. Assuming male planets possess even signs, youngsters will kick the
bucket; female planets involving odd signs demonstrate a similar outcome. In the event that the
Navamsa masters are solid, the issues will live lengthy.
Verse 75. On the off chance that the Navamsa masters are solid by being lifted up or possessing
own or amicable houses, the issues will reside long. In the event that these masters are
incapacitated or combust or involve antagonistic spots, the offspring bites the dust.
NOTES
The ruler of the Navamsa involved by the master of the fifth and the ruler of the Navamsa in

 which the fifth falls are to be thought of.
Refrain 76. The quantity of bindus found in the fifth house from Jupiter in his Ashtakavarga
outline shows the quantity of kids. Bindus contributed via planets possessing antagonistic or
weakness signs or those that are in ignition ought to be barred. Bindus contributed by a
commended or retrograde planet ought to be trebled. For a planet in vargottama or own home,
the bindus ought to be multiplied. Bindus contributed by manly planets give guys, and ladylike
ones, females.
NOTES
A prasthara ashtakavarga (see my book Ashtakavarga System of Prediction) cast for Jupiter
shows the quantity of bindus contributed by every planet. Whenever this is determined, one can
discover the bindus given by benefics, malefics, and so forth, and regardless of whether such
planets are magnified or incapacitated, and so on This mix has been clarified exhaustively with
an outline in my book on Ashtakavarga.

Model:

In Chart 1, the fifth from Jupiter is Libra. Libra has 6 bindus, the givers being Saturn, Sun,
Venus, Mercury, Moon and Lagna. Of these, Saturn is in an antagonistic sign. Venus is in
weakness. In this way, deducting 2 bindus, the rest of 4. The Sun is vargottama. Twofold the
commitment of the Sun (2). Mercury is vargottama. Twofold his commitment as well (2). The
complete now will be 8. Venus and the Moon are females. However Mercury is an eunuch he
can be viewed as a male being in a manly sign with male planet Sun. Thus the absolute number
of kids will be 8 - 6 guys and 2 females.
Verse 77. The quantity of lapsed Navamsas in the fifth house short those whose masters are in
hostile signs or crippled; the quantity of terminated Navamsas of the ruler of the fifth short those
whose masters are crippled or are in hostile houses; the quantity of planets aspecting the fifth
house: These give the quantity of issues.
NOTES
The interpretation of this verse has been made without stressing or extending the first.
8 Navamsas have lapsed in the fifth house. Saturn is in an unfriendly sign and 7 Navamsas have
lapsed for his situation. The Sun, the Moon and Jupiter are in weakness and have crossed 2, 4
and 0 Navamsas separately. That is 7 + 2 + 4 + 0 = 13.
The fifth ruler Mercury takes care of 6 Navamsas. From this we need to deduct 13. No planets
viewpoint the fifth.
The initial two cases must be disregarded since the figure from which the allowance is to be
made is not exactly the figure to be deducted. Applying this standard to the fifth house from
Model:

 Equilibrium of Saturn Dasa: 3 years, 90 days and 18 days. Chandra Lagna, a similar outcome
results under the first and second circumstances. Notwithstanding, Mars and Mercury angle the
fifth house, i.e., 2 planets.
Accepting the normal of issues according to retribution from Lagna and Chandra Lagna, we
would get 0 + 2/2 = 1. The local might anticipate 1 issue.
Refrain 78. Tne number of Rasmis got by Jupiter and the master of the fifth provides some
insight into the quantity of issues. The strategy for ascertaining Rasmis instructed to me by my
preceptor is given underneath.
Refrain 79. The most extreme number of beams designated to the Sun, the Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn individually are 10, 9, 5, 5, 7, 8 and 5. Deduct the weakness
point of a house from its real longitude. Assuming the rest of 6s (or 180°), deduct it from 12s (or
360°). Duplicate this by the planets' Rasmi and separation the item by 6s (or 180°). On the off
chance that the planet is retrograde or combust, its commitment ought to be expanded or
diminished.

NOTES
Rasmis are beams which every planet should get when in a condition of profound
commendation. The extent of positive or negative signs of a planet relies on the quantity of
Rasmis it gets amazingly. The more noteworthy the number, the more useful the outcomes.
The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn get separately 10, 9, 5, 5, 7, 8 and
5 beams in profound commendation. In profound weakness the quantity of Rasmis is zero. This
is what Kalyanavarma says in his eternal work Saravali. A similar thought is communicated
underway of Mani, Maya and Badarayana. The absolute number of Rasmis a planet can get is 49
all of the time. While a few different scholars award that the complete number is 49 they hold
that every planet in profound commendation gets 7 Rasmis independent of its inclination.
In any case, this view has not won the endorsement of Badarayana and other extraordinary
authors whose assignment of Rasmis depends on the inborn nature and attributes of the planets.
The Sun is the most splendid planet and thusly he gets 10 Rasmis in profound commendation.
The Moon, Venus and Jupiter come next in their levels of brilliancy and in this way they get 8, 8
and 7 beams individually.
A planet continuing from weakness to commendation is supposed to acquire in Rasmis. The
converse holds great when the planet is moving towards weakness from worship. Assuming that
a planet is in the middle of these two places, the quantity of Rasmis might be acquired by extent.
First the Rasmi-bend is gotten by taking away the weakness point from the planet's longitude. In
the event that the rest of more noteworthy than 180°, take away it from 360°, and the planet's
Rasmi-curve is gotten. The beams attributed to every planet being the worth when it is at its
profound praise point, the full number of beams is taken when the Rasmi-curve is 180° and the
quantity of beams demonstrated by Rasmi-bends (sphuta-rasmis) somewhere in the range of 0°

 and 180° are found by extent: - 180°: Rasmi-circular segment:: Planet's credited beams: sphutarasmi.
Assume Mercury's longitude is 180° 33'. Applying the above rules we get Mercury's Rasmicurve hence:
180° 33' - 345° (weakness point) = 195° 33' = 164° 27' = Rasmi-bend 164° 27' x 5/180°
= 4.56 Mercury's sphuta-rasmi.
In this manner the sphuta-rasmis for different planets should be learned.
The sphuta-rasmis get expanded or diminished by the planet's circumstance in the horoscope. On
the off chance that the planet possesses a well disposed Dwadasamsa, this number should be
multiplied; assuming it is in its own Navamsa, the number should be trebled; if in worship or
own home, as well as being retrograde, the number expects to be trebled. Assuming the planet
involves unfriendly or weakened

Dwadasamsa, the sphuta-rasmis should be decreased by one-sixteenth; aside from Saturn and
Venus, on the off chance that some other planet is in ignition, the sphuta-rasmis of such a planet
become zero. Assuming a planet is going to leave retrogression, its sphuta-rasmis stand to be
lessened by one-eighth. Add together the rasmis of the relative multitude of planets after the
Haraoas (decreases) and Bharanas (options) are finished.
Assuming the all out number misses the mark regarding 10, the local acquires his occupation by
asking and comparable demonstrations, becomes appalling and meanders about erratically. On
the off chance that the complete beams are somewhere in the range of 10 and 15, the outcomes
will be great person, equitably slanted and expansion in strict legend. If somewhere in the range
of 15 and 20, renowned, upright and wealthy;
if somewhere in the range of 20 and 25, fair appearance, courageous, royal and regarded; serving
rulers and notables assuming the quantity of beams is somewhere in the range of 25 and 30; if
31, 32, 33 and 34, the outcomes will be elevated place, extraordinary impact and huge riches; 35
to 39 demonstrates royal influence, sway over tremendous parcels of land and huge abundance;
over 40 causes exceptionally high Raja Yogas and the local achieves a lifted up position like that
of lords and sovereigns.
Refrain 80. Assuming the planet is retrograde or is commended, the quantity of beams ought to
be trebled. Assuming that the planet is in his own or agreeable Navamsa, the number is to be
multiplied; in antagonistic or weakness sign, diminish the beams by 1/16 section. On the off
chance that in burning, all the rasmis are killed yet if Venus and Saturn, are in ignition just half
must be removed. Of Jupiter or the master of the fifth, that ruler which has more rasmis
contributes the quantity of youngsters which the local will have.
Verse 81. Of the techniques to discover the quantity of kids talked about over, that which gives
the best number might be taken if the ruler of the fifth is solid. That which gives the most unnumber might be noted if the master of the fifth is feeble.
Time: Birth of Children

 Refrain 82. In the event that the ruler of the fifth is set close to the fifth house or the master of
the ascendant, a kid will be brought into the world while the local is extremely youthful. To the
extent that the ruler of the fifth possesses a kendra, a panapara or an apoklima, the introduction
of the kid will be in youthful, center or advanced age separately.
NOTES
Kendras are the first, the fourth, the seventh and the tenth houses. Panaparas are the second, the
fifth, the eighth and the eleventh houses, Apoklimas are the third, the sixth, the ninth and the
twelfth houses.
Refrain 83. Birth of kids can happen in the fundamental and sub-time of the ruler of the
ascendant, the master of the fifth, Jupiter, the master of the Navamsa involved by the ruler of the
fifth; the ruler of the Navamsa involved by Jupiter; the master of the seventh; the tenant of the
fifth house; and the planet who viewpoints the fifth house.

Refrain 84. At the point when Jupiter travels any of the accompanying signs, birth of an issue
might be anticipated: the sign involved by the ruler of the fifth from the ascendant; the Navamsa
sign involved by the master of the fifth; the sign involved by Gulika; the Navamsa indication of
Gulika; the threefold houses from the sign and Navamsa Rasi involved by Gulika. Of the signs
referenced above single out the one which has more bindus, in the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter. The
master of the fifth from the Moon and Jupiter ought to likewise be thought of.
NOTES
The time of birth of the youngster is learned by thinking about the travel of Jupiter in a sign - one
of the accompanying, which in Jupiter's Ashtakavarga has the biggest number of bindus. The
signs to be considered are:
(1)

the sign involved by the ruler of the fifth from the ascendant,

(2)

the Navamsa sign involved by this ruler,

(3)

the sign involved by the ruler of the fifth from the Moon,

(4)

the Navamsa sign involved by this ruler,

(5)

the sign involved by the ruler of the fifth from Jupiter,

(6)

the Navamsa sign involved by this ruler,

(7)

the sign involved by Gulika,

(8)

the Navamsa indication of Gulika and

(9) the threefold houses from the Rasi and Navamsa Rasi involved by Gulika. From certain
perspectives, the threefold places of the over nine signs ought to be thought of.
This verse offers a lot of extension for an exploration disapproved of stargazer to learn the
extended period of birth based on Jupiterian travel.

 Refrain 85. At the point when Jupiter, the master of the fifth, the ruler of the ascendant and the
ruler, of the fifth from the Moon-sign, travel the fifth house or the house involved by the ruler of
the fifth, or the threefold places of these two, the youngster will be conceived. At the point when
the rulers of the first, the fifth and the seventh travel the previously mentioned signs, then, at that
point, likewise birth of the issue can happen.
Verse 86. We have seen that the bindus in the fifth house from Jupiter, in his Ashtakavarga
graph, mean the quantity of kids. Consider the more grounded of the two signs- the sign involved
by the planet who has contributed the bindu or its Navamsa Rasi. In the event that this master
involves the principal Drekkana, the kid will be conceived when the Moon travels the sign
involved by the ruler of its Navamsa. Assuming he possesses the second Drekkana, the kid will
be brought into the world in the fifth sign from the abovementioned; on the off chance that he
involves the third Drekkana, the youngster will be conceived when the Moon travels the ninth
sign from the abovementioned. Duplicate the lapsed ghatikas of the planet in the Drekkana by
135 and partition the item by 1800. This gives the ghatikas navigated in the Nakshatra. The
outcome gives the heavenly body in which the youngster will be conceived.

NOTES
Assuming the planet involves the primary Drekkana, eliminate the Rasis in the second Drekkana,
eliminate the Rasis, and 10 degrees, and in the third Drekkana, eliminate the Rasis and 20
degrees. The rest of be changed over into minutes, duplicated by 135 and separated by 1800. In
the event that the rest of separated by 5, the quantity of Nakshatra Padas terminated will be got
and in the following Pada, the youngster will be conceived.
Refrain 87. At the point when the Moon travels the sign or Navamsa of benefics that involve or
angle the fifth house; the master of the fifth solid and all around arranged; and different planets
that are sufficiently able to give kids, there will be birth of an issue. The fifth sign from the
previously mentioned signs and Navamsas likewise give kids.

Refrain 88. We have portrayed, exhaustively, the different Bhavas, their characteristic benefits
or negative marks. They might be skilfully used in this association moreover.
Verse 89. Man needs to reclaim three obligations in his day to day existence. Issue alone can
reclaim the obligation to Pitris. Obsequies alone can't fulfill them. Consequently the introduction
of a child is vital and henceforth so a lot is said with respect to it.

Seventh House According to Birth Horoscope

Verse 1. Whenever there is ideal arrangement between horoscopy (Jataka) and horary (Prasna) in
the issue of results, things can be anticipated with more noteworthy exactness. Subsequently I am
depicting here how to peruse the life-vocation of one's better half from an assessment of the
horoscope.

 NOTES
Perusing insights concerning spouse with the assistance of Prasna has been managed in Chapter
XVII.
Verse 2. Insights about issues have been depicted in the last part. Unmarried individuals can
have no genuine issue. They are not equipped to play out any karmas as appointed in the Sruti
and Smritis. Hitched individuals need to do them. Subsequently marriage is significant for issue
and for making one fit to do every one of the appointed karmas. Antiquated sages have explained
these and from them I compose reaching my determinations in my own specific manner.
Verse 3. With regards to the spouse ought to be discovered from the seventh house, the master of
the seventh, the planet aspecting the seventh, the planet possessing the seventh and Venus.
Verse 4. The personality of the spouse relies upon the idea of the ruler of the seventh house. The
idea of the signs starting from Aries having reference to the seventh house is given beneath.
Verse 5. In the horoscope of the spouse, on the off chance that the seventh bouse turns out to be
Aries, the wife will be partial to going to sanctuaries; if Taurus, liberal in giving food; Gemini slick and clean and keeps all the family utensils clean; Cancer - enamored with washing; Leo
strict twisted of psyche; Virgo, leaned to store lovely vessels and sweet aromas; Libra, sharp in
discourse; Scorpio, shrewd in cooking; Sagittarius, attached to hearing puranic stories;
Capricorn, attached to delicate beds and light dress (sparsana sukha); Aquarius, occupied with
putting away grains and corn; and Pisces, gathering bronze vessels, sweet in words and talented
in expressive arts.
Refrain 6. At the point when the seventh house is powerless and beset by malefics, not aspected
by or related with benefics; or ruler of the seventh or the master of the first; the ruler of the
seventh and Venus possess weakened or hostile Navamsa or are in ignition or aspected by or
related with malefics without being associated with benefics or the master of the ascendant or
these involve the sixth, the eighth or the twelfth, the local won't wed. Regardless of whether he
weds, the spouse won't live lengthy.
Refrain 7. Assuming Mars possesses the seventh house, the spouse will reside separated from
his significant other or on the other hand she will kick the bucket. In the event that Saturn
viewpoints Mars in the seventh with practically no benefic association, the spouse will bite the
dust. Assuming that the seventh house is Capricorn and Jupiter possesses it or then again
assuming that the seventh house is Scorpio and Venus involves it, the spouse will pass on. In the
event that Taurus happens to, be the seventh and Mercury is put there, his first spouse will kick
the bucket.
Verse 8. On the off chance that Saturn is in the seventh indistinguishable with Pisces, assuming
Jupiter is in the seventh indistinguishable with Virgo; or then again if a solid malefic is in the
fourth; or then again if the ruler of the eighth or master of the fifth possesses the seventh; the
spouse will kick the bucket. Assuming the Sun and Venus involve the fifth, the seventh or the
ninth, the spouse will be flawed of appendages.
Refrain 9. Assuming Venus is supported in the middle malefics with next to no benefic impact,
the local's life will be imperiled by the spouse or she might pass on. On the off chance that

 malefics involve the fourth and eighth from Venus with no benefic impact, some risk or mishap
will happen to the spouse. In the event that the Sun and Rahu are in the seventh, the local will
squander all bis cash on ladies.
Refrain 10. Assuming that Venus is in a moveable sign, fixed in the middle malefics, and is
aspected by or is in relationship with Saturn, the spouse will turn into an outcaste.
Verse 11. Assuming that Venus possesses the Rasi or Navamsa of Mars or is related with or
aspected by him, the local's significant other will adore a horrible individual.
Refrain 12. Assuming Venus is in the sign or Navamsa of Saturn, or is aspected by or conjoins
Saturn; or Venus is in his weakened sign or Navamsa, the spouse will be a low reproduced one.
Verse 13. If in Venus Ashtakavarga, the seventh house from Venus has more bindus contributed
by malefics and Gulika involves a ternary from Venus, then, at that point, the spouse will kick
the bucket soon.
Refrain 14. Assuming Venus is in the indication of Mars or the Sun, or is aspected by both of
them; or Venus involves Agni Bhuta, then, at that point, the spouse's demise will be because of
fire.
NOTES
The computation of the Bhutas has been given in Chapter XVI.
Verse 15. Venus in blend with Mandi and the threefold or quadrangular house is tormented by
Rahu achieves the passing of the spouse by snakebite.
NOTES
Here the threefold (trikona) or quadrangle (kendra) is to be considered from Venus.
Refrain 16. Assuming Venus joins Saturn and a malefic is in the eighth house from Venus, the
spouse will have an unnatural demise. Proportionately as Venus possesses a quadrupedal sign,
the decanate of a bird, or a watery sign, demise will be because of a quadruped or a bird or from
water. Assuming Venus involves watery signs alongside the Moon, the spouse will be
suffocated.
NOTES
Virgo, the principal half of Sagittarius, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius are human or biped signs.
Pisces, Cancer and the last 50% of Capricorn are watery signs.

The last 50% of Sagittarius, the initial segment of Capricorn, Leo, Aries and Taurus are
quadrupedal signs. Scorpio is a keeta or bug Rasi.
Verse 17. Assuming that Venus is related to the Sun, the spouse will be beset by bhutas (or
ogres) however brought into the world of a separated family; with the Moon, preferable
reproduced and refined over the husband; with Mars, tormented by Rakshasas and will have a
lover; with Jupiter, tormented by Vidyadharas however idealistic in all activities; and with

 Mercury, taught, easy going and attractive.
Verse 18. In the event that Venus joins with Saturn, there will be inconvenience from
Gandharvas, will be partial to mean individuals and will have an awful nature and tricky
propensities; with Rahu or Ketu, attached to low kind of individuals and imperfect of some
appendage; with Gulika, and the other tertiary planets, kicks the bucket unexpectedly of mishaps;
with Ardhaprahara, passing will be because of drawn out illness.
Verse 19. If in the Ashtakavarga of Venus, the seventh house from Venus contains a bindu
contributed by the Sun, the spouse will be as dear to him as life itself; bindu contributed by the
Moon, she will be pleasing to his brain; if by Mars, consistently occupied with great deeds; if by
Mercury, exceptionally dedicated to the husband; if by Jupiter, enriched with great kids; if by
Venus, well talented in artistic expressions of happiness; and if by Saturn, serve him dependably
as a worker.

NOTES
In Venus Asbtakavarga, the bindus of Venus never fall in the seventh house from him. Thus the
main development conceivable is that the bindus alluded to should be "seventh house from the
ascendant rather than Venus".
Refrain 20. Assuming Jupiter or Venus possesses the seventh house, his better half will be of his
own standing. By looking at the more grounded of the two planets, viz., the master of the sign
involved by the ruler of the seventh or Navamsa master of the ruler of the seventh every one of
the insights about the actual highlights of the spouse like tone, height, and so on, ought to be
discovered.
Verse 21. Of Venus, the ruler of the seventh and the planet involving the seventh, the more
grounded will provide some insight into the shading, nature, position, and so forth, of the spouse.
Verse 22. Whenever a benefic possesses the ninth house from Venus and the ruler of the ninth is
solid, the spouse will be profound leaning, fortunate, and will have many issues.
Refrain 23. At the point when the ruler of the seventh is a benefic and is aspected by or is in
relationship with benefics, or solid planets involve the fifth, seventh, ninth and eleventh from the
sign involved by the master of the seventh, then, at that point, a lady will be cherished by her
significant other and youngsters. If not, the spouse will be infertile and wiped out.
NOTES

In the event that the ruler of the seventh is a malefic or aspected by malefics, or malefics or
powerless benefics possess the fifth, the seventh, the ninth, and the eleventh from the sign
involved by the master of the seventh, then, at that point, the spouse will be wiped out and
desolate.
Verse 24. In the event that the seventh house is involved or aspected by its ruler or benefics, and
the seventh house is unequivocally arranged; or then again if the master of the seventh and

 Venus are very much arranged, the local will have the fortune of getting a decent spouse.
Refrain 25. On the off chance that the ruler of the seventh is exceptionally solid, the local will
wed a young lady from a rich family. On the off chance that he is frail, he will wed from an
unfortunate family and the spouse won't great look.

Refrain 26. In the event that the ruler of the seventh is related with or aspected by or fixed in the
middle benefics, the local will get a decent spouse and kids.
Refrain 27. At the point when the ruler of the seventh or Venus possesses the indication of a
benefic or is in the Navamsa of a benefic and the master of the tenth is solid, the local will wed a
lady with great characteristics.
Verse 28. If the seventh, the ruler of the seventh or Venus is solid and is aspected by Jupiter, one
gets a dedicated spouse.
Refrain 29. Assuming the master of the seventh or the Sun is aspected by Venus or Mercury,
and the ruler of the seventh has the relationship of Jupiter, the spouse will be modest and
highminded disapproved.
Verse 30. If the ruler of the seventh involves a quadrant, and is aspected by benefics or is set in a
benefic sign and a benefic Navamsa, the spouse will be a paragon of virtuousness.
Refrain 31. Assuming the ruler of the seventh or the Sun possesses a malefic sign and a malefic
Navamsa, or is aspected by or related with malefics, the spouse will be leaned to bad habit.
Verse 32. Whenever Rahu or Ketu involves the seventh house; when it is aspected by malefics;
when the seventh house falls in a malefic Navamsa, the spouse is wicked, leaned to harm the
husband, has a shrewd standing and will be of a pugnacious sort.

Refrain 33. Assuming Venus is in the seventh house, the spouse will be indecent and
enthusiastic. Assuming benefics are solid in the seventh house, he will be attached to his own
better half. Assuming that Mars possesses the seventh, he will be attached to numerous ladies; if
Saturn, he will be leaned to desire low-class ladies. On the off chance that the Sun possesses the
seventh, he will be enamored with others' spouses.
Verse 34. On the off chance that the rulers of the ascendant and the seventh house are
companions, the spouse's relatives will be well disposed towards the local. Assuming that the
masters of the seventh and ascendant are adversaries, the spouse and her relatives will be
unfriendly towards him.
Refrain 35. Assuming the master of the ascendant is exceptionally solid and the ruler of the
seventh is in a benefic Navamsa aspected by or related with benefics, involves Vaisesbikamsa or
is commended, the individual will wed in a high-conceived family.

Refrain 36. At the point when the ruler of the ascendant is without strength and the master of the

 seventh involves an unfriendly Rasi and a crippled or antagonistic Navamsa, is combust, and is
conjoined by malefics, the local will wed a young lady having a place with a family lower than
his own.
Refrain 37. At the point when the ascendant is a typical sign and when the Moon and the ruler of
the seventh involve normal signs, or share their Navamsas for all intents and purpose signs, when
two planets possess the eleventh and eunuch planets involve the seventh house, the local will
remarry. Whenever the Sun and Mars are in the seventh house, or in their own Navamsas in the
seventh house, he will have just a single spouse however he might wed numerous ladies.
Verse 38. The local will wed three ladies if the rulers of the seventh (both from the ascendant
and the Moon) and Venus are solid and possess great houses. If any two of these are solid, he
will wed two ladies, and if by some stroke of good luck one alone is solid, he will wed just one.
At the point when the master of the seventh or Venus is lifted up or when multiple planets
involve the seventh house he might wed three or significantly more ladies. The quantity of
spouses can be determined from the quantity of Navamsas finished by the ruler of the seventh.
Verse 39. Whenever the seventh house is solid, when Venus and the ruler of the seventh are
commended, or possess their own signs, or have vargottama or magnified Navamsa, the local
will wed a subsequent lady.
NOTES
In verses 37, 38 and 39 mixes for more than one spouse are given. In completely cultivated
nations, the thing to address is monogamy. This suggests that when an outline demonstrates
beyond what one mate, it tends to be under the accompanying circumstances: (a) demise of life
partner, (b) separate, (c) furtive relationships, not endorsed by regulation or society.
Under (c) we might incorporate specific gatherings, for example, the Moslems whose regulations
license more than one spouse simultaneously. Indeed, even among Moslems there are men who
have hitched and stayed dedicated to their life partners without exploiting their regulations which
grant more than one spouse. Graphs of such locals show just a single spouse.
The Lagna and the Moon are in like manner signs. Rahu and Jupiter possess the eleventh. The
seventh ruler Jupiter is solid in the eleventh; so likewise Venus who is lifted up in the tenth. The
local had more than one spouse. Where the word remarry is utilized it implies, a second or third
marriage after the demise or separation of at least one companions.

Model:
Outline: Born 7-4-1893 at 9-37 a.m. (LMT) at 20 N 56, 75 E 55.

Refrain 40. If the seventh and second are tormented by malefics, their rulers are frail, the local
will remarry. This is as per Sarvartha Chintamani.
Refrain 41. If a malefic is set in the seventh or eighth, Mars is in twelfth house and the seventh
house is not the slightest bit benefited by the ruler of the seventh, then, at that point, additionally

 remarriage can occur.
Verse 42. In the event that the master of the Navamsa involved by the ruler of the seventh is
combust or crippled or is in an antagonistic house, or is aspected by a malefic, or fixed in the
middle of two malefics, the local might wed more than one lady.
Verse 43. Whenever various malefics possess the second or the seventh, and ruler of the second
or the seventh is aspected by malefics, one might wed three ladies.
Verse 44. On the off chance that a malefic planet involves the ascendant, or the second or the
seventh, the ruler of the seventh turns out to be in ignition, one will have three spouses.
Verse 45. On the off chance that the master of the seventh is in a quadrant or a ternary,
possessing magnified, own or amicable sign, and is conjoined by the ruler of the tenth, the local
will have many spouses.
Refrain 46. If the rulers of the eleventh and the seventh are in shared viewpoint, are solid or set
in thirds, one will have many spouses.
Refrain 47. Assuming the accompanying end up being the Jan mama Rasi of the spouse, there
will be common concordance and arrangement between the husband and the wife: (1) the sign
involved by the master of the seventh; (2) the Navamsa involved by the seventh ruler; (3) the
commendation indication of the ruler of the seventh; (4) the weakness indication of the ruler of
the seventh; (5) the sign involved by Venus; (6) the Navamsa involved by Venus; (7) the fifth
and ninth from the abovementioned; the sign containing the bindu of the master of the seventh
from the house involved by Venus in Venus, Ashtakavarga diagram.
Refrain 48. The wedded existence of the couple will be cheerful if the male weds a young lady
brought into the world in the sign involved by the master of the Chandra Kakshya in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga, or in the sign involved by the ruler of the ascendant.

NOTES
Model:
Leave the Moon alone in 16° Libra in the male horoscope.
Each kaksha being 3° 45', the Moon will be in the fifth kaksha administered by Venus. (For
subtleties of kaksha assurance, allude to Notes under verse 106, Chapter XVIII).
Allow Venus to involve Gemini. Marriage with a young lady brought into the world in Gemini
ascendant will be blissful.
Or then again, let the male's ascendant be Aries with Mars, its ruler, being set in Virgo. A lady
with Virgo ascendant would give joy to the male.
Refrain 49. Discover the asterism of the amount of the longitudes of Venus and the master of the
ascendant; similarly discover the asterism of the amount of the longitudes of the ascendant and
the seventh. Again discover the asterism of the amount of the longitudes of the planet that
perspectives the seventh house and the master of the seventh. The asterism of the spouse will be

 one among the previously mentioned three asterisms.
Refrain 50. Assuming that a man weds a lady from any of these Diks referenced underneath,
their conjugal life will be cheerful: (1) The Dik represented by the ruler of the seventh; (2) the
Dik demonstrated by the sign involved by the master of the seventh; (3) the Dik showed by the
Navamsa ruler of the seventh; (4) the Dik showed by the sign involved by Venus; (5) the Dik
showed by the Navamsa Rasi of Venus; (6) the Dik demonstrated by the seventh Rasi from
Venus; (7) the Dik demonstrated by the master who is in the seventh from the ascendant; (8) the
Dik showed by the ruler who viewpoints the seventh from the ascendant; (9) the Dik
demonstrated by the master who is in the seventh from Chandra Lagna; (10) the Dik
demonstrated by the ruler who angles the seventh from the Moon; (11) the Dik showed by the
Rasi holding benefics and contains a more prominent number of bindus in Venus Ashtakavarga
diagram; (12) the Dik showed by the Rasi where the ruler of the first stands and has an enormous
number of bindus in Ashtakavarga outline; and (13) the Dik showed by the sign where the ruler
of the seventh stands and holds countless bindus in the above graph.

NOTES
Here are given various Rasis and planets. An inquiry might manifest on the best way to choose
one from these. Take the most grounded of the planets and the sign yielding more signs. From
these, fix the Dik. A marriage from that heading will get bliss as it were.
Refrain 51. After decreases in the Ashtaka-varga of Venus, take that sign which contains more
bindus. Assuming the marriage be led from the bearing showed by this sign, it will give felicity
and joy.

Refrain 52. The spouse will be from a far off place assuming the sign involved by the ruler of
the seventh, the Navamsa Rasi of the master of the seventh, the Rasi involved by Venus, and the
Navamsa Rasi of Venus, are generally versatile. Assuming that they are fixed, the spouse will be
from an adjoining place. In the event that they are normal, she will have a place with a spot
neither far nor close.
Refrain 53. We have given numerous signs fixing the asterism and the spot the spouse hails
from. One can have a cheerful hitched life assuming he takes as his significant other a young
lady brought into the world in a spot and an asterism wherein there is more than one fortuitous
event of lakshanas or characteristic signs.

Refrain 54. Similarly as the insights about the spouse are found out by investigating the seventh
house, the ruler of the seventh and Venus, and so on, in a man's horoscope, in a similar way
subtleties of the husband can be learned in the female's horoscope by breaking down the seventh
house, the master of the seventh and Venus, and so on
Verse 55. On the off chance that an underhanded planet possesses the eighth house in the female
horoscope, the spouse will pass on. Be that as it may, assuming a benefic possesses the second

 house, she will kick the bucket before the spouse. If Saturn aspected by an abhorrent planet
involves the seventh house, she will bite the dust a virgin and no one will approach to wed her.
However the presence of insidious planets in the seventh and eighth houses shows widowhood,
the solid presence of a benefic in the ninth house turns away the impact of widowhood. These
eccentricities ought to be painstakingly investigated in the horoscope of a lady.
Refrain 56. Certain characteristics in regards to the female horoscope have been itemized by
Varaha Mihira in the 22nd Chapter of Brihat Jataka. They ought to be painstakingly
contemplated and applied and the outcomes anticipated.
Verse 57. In the horoscope of the male, the seventh house and Venus picture the existence of the
spouse. In the horoscope of the spouse, the eighth house and Saturn uncover the qualities of the
husband.
Verse 58. When does the marriage occur - early age, middle age or advanced age?
In which Dasa does it come ? These are to be determined as follows:
Refrain 59. Marriage happens in early life assuming a solid benefic ruler of the seventh house is
in relationship with the master of the ascendant; or a solid Venus joins with the master of the
ascendant; or Venus and the ruler of the seventh possess quadrants. At the point when the master
of the 7lh and Venus involve Upachaya signs (3, 6, 10 and 11), success will first light after
marriage. At the point when the ruler of the seventh is far away from the seventh and the first
houses, marriage will by and large occur after the sprout of youth.
Refrain 60. At the point when the master of the seventh stands close to the ruler of the ascendant
or a benefic is set close to the first or seventh house, marriage happens from the get-go
throughout everyday life.

Verse 61. When benefics possess the ascendant, the second and the seventh and these houses
have benefic vargas or when these masters are in benefic vargas, marriage will occur from the
get-go throughout everyday life.
Verse 62. On the off chance that the master of the seventh is in parvatamsa, the ruler of the
second is solid, and the ruler of the ascendant is in mridwamsa, marriage will occur even before
the prime of youth. This is the assessment of the admired sages.
NOTES
The 46th Shashtyamsa is known as Mridwamsa.
Refrain 63. If Venus, the master of the seventh and the ruler of the second are in Upachayas, and
the ruler of the ascendant is aspected by benefics, favorable luck will follow the couple after
marriage.
Refrain 64. At the point when the rulers of the seventh, the second and the ascendant and Venus
involve horrible houses, and are combust, incapacitated or in unfriendly Navamsas, setbacks will
trail closely behind marriage.
Refrain 65. Marriage can happen in the major and sub-times of the planets involving the seventh

 house, the planets aspecting the seventh house, the master of the seventh, the ruler of the sign
involved by the master of the seventh, the Navamsa master of the master of the seventh, Venus,
the Moon or the Navamsa ruler of the ascendant. Some Acharyas believe that the time of Rahu
can likewise be incorporated.
NOTES
While it is very evident that marriage can be anticipated in the Dasa or Bhukti of planets
connected with the seventh house which is the Kalatrasthana, or Venus, the karaka for marriage,
or the Navamsa (the sub-divisional diagram for checking all matters connected with marriage)
the rationale behind Rahu's ability to allow marriage isn't clear. By the by most old style
specialists perceive Rahu's marriage-causing capacities in his Dasa.
Verse 66. Whenever Venus or the master of the ascendant or the ruler of the Moon-sign or the
ruler of the seventh travels the seventh house, the house involved by the master of the seventh, or
the threefold indications of these two, the marriage will happen. Whenever Jupiter travels the
sign involved by the ruler of the seventh, the Navamsa indication of the master of the seventh, or
the fifth and ninth from the above signs, marriage happens.
Refrain 67. For a severe recognition of Dharma, and the introduction of issue marriage is
fundamental. Insights about spouse and marriage are portrayed based on horoscopy.

Marriage Compatibility

Refrain 1. The presence of similarity or in any case between the couple to be hitched is to be
found out based on their introduction to the world stars.
Verses 2 and 3. Prior to concluding a marriage, arrangement as to the accompanying ought to be
thought of: Rasyadhipa, Nakshatra, Varna, Yoni, Gana, Rishi, Pakshi, Mriga, Vedha, Bhuta,
Rajju, Vayas, Ashtakavarga and Sakti.
Verse 4. With respect to first Rasi understanding, the creator of Sarvasiddhi says: "The male
brought into the world in the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth Rasis from that of the female
ought not go into wedlock. On the off chance that both have a similar Janma Rasi, marriage
should be possible given both are not of a similar Nakshatra.
NOTES
The count is generally from the Janma Rasi (revolutionary Moon of the young lady).
Verse 5. Whenever the lady is brought into the world in an odd Janma Rasi, then, at that point,
the man brought into the world in the sixth and eighth accordingly can be taken as a
discretionary measure. In the event that she is brought into the world in an even Janma Rasi, the
man brought into the world in the sixth ought to be dismissed and the eighth can be
acknowledged.
Refrain 6. Madhavacharya is of the assessment that the Janma Rasi of the man falling in the
second from that of the lady will cause deficiency of cash; in the fifth gives loss of kids; in the

 sixth causes sicknesses, risk and detachment; in the third, distress; and in the fourth, fights and
false impressions.
Verse 7. Brihaspati is of the assessment that the man brought into the world in the sixth and
eighth from the Janma Rasi of the young lady gets misfortunes and ruin, except if both the Rasis
are represented by a similar planet or are well disposed to one another.
Refrain 8. Assuming the Janma Rasis of both the man and the lady have 'Vasya' and don't have
'Vedha', then, at that point, the sixth and the eighth attitudes can be acknowledged as great.
Verse 9. Whenever the spouse's Janma Rasi is the fifth or second from that of the lady of the
hour, similarity doesn't exist. Regardless of whether the masters of both are common enemies, an
individual brought into the world in the seventh can be acknowledged as excellent.
Verse 10. Assuming the husband's Moon is in the sixth or eighth from that of the lady, then, at
that point, they will separate or fight or kick the bucket. Assuming he is brought into the world in
the second or twelfth, they will experience the ill effects of neediness. Assuming he is brought
into the world in the fifth, their youngsters will pass on. Assuming he is brought into the world in
other Rasis, they will appreciate success, bliss and riches.
If the rulers of both are shared adversaries or then again in the event that they have vedha dosha,
the shades of malice chaperon on second, 5tb, sixth, eighth and twelfth will be felt in a more
prominent degree. Assuming these rulers end up being very much the same planet and in the
event that they have Vasya, these shades of malice won't be felt.
Verse 11. Assuming it is found in the horoscopes of the spouse and the wife, that the ascendant,
its Navamsa, the Moon and its Navamsa end up being Virgo, Scorpio, Taurus or Leo, then, at
that point, there will be no issue brought into the world to the couple.
Refrain 12. Capricorn and Pisces represent the yonees (sex organs) of birds; Cancer and Scorpio
represent reptile sex organs; Aries, Taurus, Leo and Capricorn indicate creatures; and Gemini,
Virgo, Libra, Aquarius and Sagittarius affirm human.
Refrain 13. On the off chance that the yonees of the man and the lady as demonstrated by the
Rasis be a similar then it very well may be considered as great; assuming one is pasu-yonee
(creature sex) and the other nara-yonee (human sex), it is fair; in a similar way, in the event that
one is pasu and the other pakshi (bird) or sarasripa, it is troublesome; assuming that one is human
and the other reptile or bird, it is awful and ought not be acknowledged.
Verse 14. In Muhurtha Sangraha, it is expressed that a man brought into the world in the 6 signs
from the seventh from the Janma Rasi of the lady can be taken for wedlock. However, a man
brought into the world in the sixth can be thought of as just as madhyama or normal. The male
brought into the world in the fourth likewise can be acknowledged whether different things of
arrangement are available. The rest ought to be dismissed.
NOTES
The creator frequently cites various specialists. The refrain being referred to offers the viewpoint
of the renowned book Muhurtha Sangraha.
A husband, having his extreme Moon or Janma Rasi in the seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh

 or twelfth from the extreme Moon of the lady, can be considered for marriage. In any case,
assuming one's Janma Rasi turns out to be the sixth from that of the young lady, then, at that
point, the understanding is madhyama or moderate or common. The groom's Janma Rasi being
the fourth from that of the lady of the hour is acceptable given different elements of arrangement
are available.
Verse 15. On the off chance that the birth star groupings of the kid and the young lady end up
being something very similar, marriage is admissible given it isn't Jyeshta, Moola, Poorvashadha,
Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha, Hasta, Rohini, Dhanishta, Satabhisha, Aridra or Bharani.
Verse 16. Assuming that both the couple have a similar Janma Rasi, yet not a similar asterism, it
is great. Children and grandsons will issue out of the wedlock. In the event that both have a
similar asterism, dread from poison must be prepared for. Assuming the couple's Janma Rasis are
commonly seventh from one another, the couple will adore truly. In the event that the Rasis are
dwirdwadasa and furthermore end up being the finish of Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, the couple
will encounter neediness. Here closes the initial segment of Rasyaanukulya.

NOTES
Whenever the Janma Rasis of the couple are second and twelfth from one another, the
partnership is to be dismissed assuming the Rasi of either the man of the hour or the lady falls
toward the finish of Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces.
Verse 17. Assuming that a male is brought into the world in a Rasi for which the Rasi of the lady
is Vasya, then, at that point, it is ideal. Each Rasi has a Vasya Rasi and they are: Aries - Leo and
Scorpio; Taurus - Cancer and Libra; Gemini - Virgo, Cancer - Scorpio and Sagittarius; Leo Libra; Virgo Gemini and Pisces; Libra - Virgo and Capricorn; Scorpio - Cancer. Sagittarius Pisces; Capricorn - Aries and Aquarius; and Aquarius and Pisces - Capricorn.
NOTES
Assuming the Vasya Rasi of the Janma Rasi of the young lady turns out to be the indication of
the husband, it is said that vasya kuta wins.
Verse 18. In the event that the Vasya Rasi of the man's Janma Rasi turns out to be the Janma
Rasi of the young lady, then, at that point, it is propitious. The Janma Rasis of both ought to be
commonly Vasya Rasis. A couple brought into the world in Vasya Rasis, whenever burdened,
will have a caring existence.
Refrain 19. If the rulers of the Janma Rasis of both are companions, or are very much the same,
the match can be acknowledged. Planetary companionships are arranged subsequently: The Sun
has Jupiter as his companion; the Moon - Mercury and Jupiter; Mars - Mercury and Venus;
Mercury - the Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn; Jupiter - the Sun, the Moon, Mercury and
Saturn; Venus - Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn; and Saturn - Mercury, Jupiter and Venus.
Verse 20. For any planet the rulers of the fourth, second, fifth, eighth, ninth and twelfth from its
own Moola-trikona Rasi are companions. The rest are foes.

 NOTES
This verse is from Vidya Madhaveeyam a renowned work on Muhurta or electional soothsaying.
The retribution of companionships, as indicated by this refrain, depends on Satyacharya's
announcement alluded to by Varaha Mihira in Brihat Jataka - (...) and that implies for any planet,
the master of its worship, and the second, twelfth, fourth, fifth, ninth and eighth from its
Moolatrikona signs are his companions.
Take for example the Moon. His Moolatrikona is Taurus. The fourth is Leo and the master is the
Sun. He is a companion of the Moon. The second and fifth are governed by Mercury. He is the
companion of the Moon. The twelfth from Taurus is controlled by Mars. He could be a
companion. In any case, Mars likewise leads the seventh which isn't one of the houses referenced
in the verse. Hence, Mars is just an impartial.
The eighth from Taurus is governed by Jupiter who is additionally the ruler of the eleventh,
which is excluded from the rundown. Accordingly Jupiter is likewise an impartial. Venus is no
question the master of the commendation indication of the Moon. Be that as it may, Venus
likewise claims the sixth and subsequently he turns into an impartial to the Moon. As per a
similar contention Saturn additionally turns into an unbiased.
The accompanying table in light of this refrain is given for the data of the peruser.

Planet
Sun

Friend

Neutral

Moon, Mars and Jupiter

Mercury Saturn, Venus

Moon Sun and Mercury Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Venus

None

Mars Jupiter, the Moon, the Sun

Mercury

Venus, Saturn

Mercury

Sun, Venus Mars, Jupiter Saturn

Jupiter

Sun, Moon, Mars Saturn

Moon

Mercury, Venus

Venus Mercury, Saturn Mars, Jupiter

Sun, Moon

Saturn

Sun, Moon, Mars.

Mercury, Venus

Enemy

Jupiter

With this verse Rasyadhipati thought closes.
Verse 21. Then, at that point, comes the third thought known as Dina Kuta. The birth asterism is
known as janmarsha; the tenth from it is karmarsha; and the nineteenth asterism from it is
adhanarksha. The third, sixth, seventh asterisms from the janmarsha of the young lady ought to
be kept away from.
Refrain 22. The groom brought into the world in the third and seventh asterisms from the birth
asterism of the young lady acquires inconvenience. One brought into the world in the fifth causes
more difficulty.

 NOTES
As indicated by this verse a kid brought into the world in the third or seventh asterism from that
of the young lady ought not be thought of. Be that as it may, one brought into the world in the
fifth is more foreboding.
Refrain 23. The individual brought into the world in the 88th Navamsa from the quarter of the
birth star of a young lady acquires evil as it were. One brought into the world in the 108th
Navamsa from the Navamsa of the young lady's star is similarly awful.
NOTES
Here the Navamsa alludes to the Navamsa position of the Moon and not that of the ascendant.
Refrain 24. Assuming the birth star of the kid turns out to be the fourth, the seventh or the tenth
from that of the young lady, it advances their prosperity. The farther the birth asterism of the kid
is from the young lady's star, the better it will be for their satisfaction.
Refrain 25. Assuming the young lady is brought into the world in the fourth asterism from that
of the kid, it is Mahendra; on the off chance that she is brought into the world in the seventh, it is
known as Upendra. Mahendra gives abundance and grain and Upendra gives youngsters.
Verse 26. Whenever the quantity of asterisms counted from the asterism of the young lady to
that of the kid surpasses 15, it is excellent. This is called Streedeergha.
Refrain 27. The six stars starting from Aswini to Aridra, Punarvasu to Uttara, Hasta to Jyeshta
and Moola to Satabhisha in normal request rule the Brahmin, the Kshatriya, the Vaisya, the
Sudra, anuloma and pratiloma stations. Poorvabhadra, Uttarabhadra and Revati mean the
Brahmin, the Kshatriya and Vaisya separately.
NOTES
Aswini, Bharani, Krittika, Rohinit Mrigasira and Aridra address individually the Brahmin, the
Kshatriya, the Vaisya, the Sudra, the anuloma and the pratiloma ranks. Similarly consider from
Punarvasu, Hasta and Moola. The last three stars mean the Brahmin, Kshatriya and Vaisya.
Verse 28. In the event that both the kid and the young lady have a place with a similar position
(varna), it is awesome. In the event that the kid is of a higher rank, and the young lady is of a
lower station, it is additionally allowable. On the off chance that the young lady is of a higher
station and the man is of a lower grade, it is prohibited. Assuming one of them is anuloma and
the other has a place with one of the four stations, it is acceptable. Assuming one of them is
pratiloma and the other is one of the four ranks, it is to be dismissed.
NOTES
The varnas of the man and the lady are not entirely settled from the Nakshatras as given in the
27th verse.
Refrain 29. Brihaspati is of the assessment that both ought to be of a similar standing; the man
should be higher in position, assuming the couple have a place with two distinct ranks; in the
event that the man is to be lower in station, it ought to be kept away from. The first is awesome,
the second is conventional and the third is most reduced.

 Verse 30. Sex similarity (yonyanukulya) can be considered in two ways and they are given
beneath: If a young lady is brought into the world in a female asterism and the kid in a male, the
couple will be blissful. In the event that both are female asterisms, there is loss of riches.
Assuming that both are male asterisms, it is to be dismissed. Aswini, Bharani, Pushyami,
Aslesha, Makha, Uttara, Swati, Visakha, Jyeshta, Moola, Poorva-shadha, Uttarabhadra, Sravana,
Poorvabhadra are male asterisms. The excess 13 are ladylike in sex.
Verse 31. Another view: Aswini, Rohini, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Hasta, Anuradha, Sravana,
Poorvabhadra, Uttarabhadra are manly star groupings. Mrigasira, Moola and Satabhisha are
eunuchs; the excess 15 are ladylike in sex. A man brought into the world in a male asterism
wedding a lady brought into the world in a similar star is ominous. A man brought into the world
in a male asterism and a lady brought into the world in a female asterism is great. A man brought
into the world in a male asterism and a lady brought into the world in an eunuch is great.
A man brought into the world in a female star and a lady brought into the world in a male one is
nindya (fit to be reproached). A man brought into the world in a female star and a lady brought
into the world in a ladylike asterism is conventional. A man brought into the world in a female
star and a lady brought into the world in an eunuch isn't leaned toward. A man brought into the
world in an eunuch star and a lady brought into the world in a manly star ought to be dismissed.
A man brought into the world in an eunuch star and a lady in a ladylike star is tolerable. Also a
man brought into the world in an eunuch and a lady in an eunuch isn't inclined toward.
Gananukulya
Verse 32. Revati, Aswini, Anuradha, Sravana, Swati, Punarvasu, Mrigasira, Hasta, Pushyami
have a place with divine classification. Bharani, Pubba, Poorva-shadha, Poorvabhadra, Aridra,
Uttara, Uttara-shadha, Uttarabhadra and Rohini have a place with human classification. What's
more the leftover are of a demoniacal sort.
Assuming the kid and the young lady have a place with heavenly and demoniacal gatherings,
fights and even passing might happen. Assuming the heavenly gathering and human gathering
are united, the yoni kuta will be normal.
Refrain 33. Assuming that the kid and the young lady have the equivalent gana, it is profoundly
favorable. Assuming the kid is of Deva Gana and the young lady of Kara Gana, it is genuinely
great. A man of Asura Gana and a lady of Nara Gana is common. A man of Nara Gana and a
lady of Deva Gana is awful. A man of Nara Gana and a lady of Asura Gana ought not be united.

NOTES
Light is tossed on the meanings of Ganas - deva (divine), manusha (human) and rakshasa
(devilish) in my book Muhurtha or Electional Astrology to which my regarded peruser is
alluded. It looks like the gunas address different mental personalities. We can generally compare
the deva with satwic nature, the manusha with thamasic nature and the rakshasa with rajasic
nature. In genuine practice, it is observed that except if there are solid remedys, a rakshasa gana
young lady is for the most part contentious and fit for keeping the spouse in unending pressure,
regardless of the multitude of other beneficial characteristics she might have.

 Assuming both the kid and the young lady are brought into the world in rakshasa gana stars, the
home will be an authentic front line, amplifying each trifle into a huge issue. Either the spouse or
the wife ought to have a changing limit in the event that general harmony is to win.
Nonetheless, there are a few special cases which are managed in the following refrain.
Refrain 34. Work out the Nakshatras for the ascendants of the kid and the young lady. On the
off chance that these asterisms show understanding by gunas; or woik out likewise the
Nakshatras of the masters of the Chandra Navamsa of the couple; assuming there is arrangement
between the gunas of these two Nakshatras; or on the other hand assuming there is stree-deergha,
the complaint of a kid in a human asterism wedding a young lady brought into the world in a
demoniac star can be disregarded.
Gotranukulya (Agreement of Gotra)
Refrain 35. Aswini, Pubba, Swati, Abhijit mean Marichi Gotra; Bharani, Aslesha, Visakha,
Sravana imply Vasishta Gotra; Krittika, Makha, Anuradha, Dhanishta have a place with
Angirasa Gotra; Rohini, Pubba, Jyeshta and Satabhisha have a place with Athri Gotra; Mrigasira,
Uttara, Moola, Poorvabhadra have a place with Pulaha Gotra; and Punarvasu, Chitta,

Uttarashadha and Revati imply Kretu Gotra. The Gotras of the couple ought to be discovered
from their introduction to the world asterisms.
Verse 36. On the off chance that the kid and the young lady have a place with a similar Gotra, it
brings fiasco. Assuming the Gotras are unique, thriving will come in. Assuming the Gotras of
Nakshatras worked out as per the ascendant are something very similar, the outcome is common.

NOTES
Assuming there is no similarity between the Gotras in light of the birth asterisms of the kid and
the young lady, then, at that point, discover the asterisms based on the ascendant marks of the
couple. Assuming that the Gotras are something similar here additionally, the similarity in regard
of this thing is conventional.
Vihanganakulyam
Refrain 37. Aswini to Mrigasira mean the bird Bharandhaka; Aridra to Pubba - Pingala; Uttara to
Anuradha - Kaka (crow); Jyeshta to Sravana - chicken; and Dhanishta to Revati - peacock.
Assuming the asterisms of the couple show a similar bird, it is favorable.
NOTES
Assuming that one is cordial to the next, it is tolerable. Assuming that one is the normal foe of
the other, it is awful.
Verse 38. The groups of stars have been alloted to the yonis of specific creatures in the request
starting with Aswini: horse, elephant, she-goat, snake, canine, feline, sheep, feline, mouse,
rodent, camel, he-bison (bull), lion, he-bison (bull), tiger, stag, deer, canine, monkey, bull,

 monkey, she-bison, horse, lady, cow and elephant. In the event that the asterisms of the kid and
the young lady administer creatures which concur in nature, the wedded couple will live
agreeably. In the event that they are common adversaries, the couple likewise will fight and
division will come in.
Refrain 39. Assuming that the asterisms of the couple go under impact of the accompanying
creatures, there will be family felicity and joy. They are elephant, horse, cow, lady, stag, goat,
she-goat and feline. On the off chance that tiger and snake end up being the creatures of the
couple, passing might result.
Verse 40. The feline and the snake are normal foes; so are the rodent and the canine; so are the
pony and she-bison. Lion has no regular foe. Canine, mouse, feline, canine and snake are shared
foes. Henceforth burdening people managed by these will be sad.
NOTES
Burdening the two (man and lady) controlled by creatures having hostile yonis will mean
something bad to everyday life.
Verse 41. As indicated by Madhaveeya, tiger is the adversary of cow, canine, lady, he-bison,
stag, goat and monkey. Canine is the adversary of cow, goat, she-goat, monkey and stag. Feline
and rodent are common adversaries. Elephant and stag are adversaries. Pony and he-bison are
normal adversaries. Feline and snake are customarily unwilling. At the point when we consider
this similarity, we should see whether the asterisms show similar creature or creatures amicable
to each other. Assuming that they end up being hostile yonis, they are awful.
Refrain 42. As per Brihaspati, Chitta administers the yoni of the tiger. In Muhurtha Ratna, it is
said that Chitta administers lion. As this is questionable, it is passed on to the circumspection of
the figured out how to settle for sure.
Vedha Dosha
Verse 43. The asterisms can be grouped into 5 divisions in this manner: Kantha - Rohini. Aridra,
Hasta, Swati, Sravana, Satabhisha; Kati - Bharani, Pushyami, Pubba, Anuradha, Poorvashadha,
Uttara-bhadra; Pada - Aswini, Aslesha, Makha, Jyeshta, Moola, Revati; Siro - Mrigasira, Chitta,
Dhanishta; and Kukshi - Krittika, Punarvasu, Uttara, Visakha, Uttara, Poorvabhadra.
Refrain 44. In the event that the asterisms of the couple don't fall in the equivalent varga or
division, it is useful of good outcomes. On the off chance that the asterisms fall in the first varga
(Kantha), the outcome is widowhood; if in Kati, destitution results; if in Pada, far off
movements; if in Siro - passing will follow; and if Kukshi - loss of kids. The Vedha flaw ought
to likewise be investigated while developing new structures.
Refrain 45. Every asterism has a vedha asterism as follows: Aswini - Jyeshta, Bharani Anuradha, Aridra - Sravana, Krittika - Visakha, Rohini - Swati, Aslesha
- Moola, Makha - Revati, Pushyami - Poorvashadha, Punarvasu - Uttarashadha, Pubba Uttarabhadra, Hasta - Satabhisha, Uttara - Poorvabhadra; Mrigasira, Chitta, Dhanishta are
commonly vedhas or repulsing together. The asterisms of the couple ought not fall in the vedha
bunch.

 NOTES
Vedha stars are repulsing together. In this way Aswini repulses Jyeshta, Aridra repulses Sravana,
etc. The husband's and the lady's stars ought not fall in a similar repulsing bunch. Mrigasira,
Chitta and Dhanishta are additionally vedha stars commonly.
Refrain 46. Assuming that there is Vedha hardship both the spouse and the wife will go to rack
and destroy. Regardless of whether there are different things of arrangement as Vasya, and so
forth, Vedha will win. The Vedha stars are associated with the sixth and seventh somewhat.

Bhuthanukulya
Refrain 47. The 27 heavenly bodies have been grouped into 5 Bhutas or components along these
lines: Prithvi (hearty): Aswini, Bharani, Krittika, Rohini, Mrigasira; Jala (watery): Aridra,
Punarvasu, Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha, Pubba; Teja (red hot): Uttara, Hasta, Chitta, Swati,
Visakha; Vayu (breezy): Anuradha, Jyeshta, Moola, Poorvashadha, Uttara-shadha and

Sravana; and Akasa (ethereal): Dhanishta, Satabhisha, Poorvabhadra, Uttara-bhadra and Revati.
Assuming the asterisms of the couple are of indeed the very same Bhuta, it is great. Assuming
one is flying and the other is red hot, it is similarly great. Assuming that one is hearty and the
other has a place with some other Bhuta, it is likewise great. In the event that one has watery
Bhuta, and different has red hot Bhuta, it is awful. On the off chance that ethereal Bhuta joins
with some other Bhuta, it is tolerable.
Verse 48. Bhutas are characterized into 5 as given above, however a few authors say that
Gemini, Virgo, mean Prithvi; Taurus, Cancer and Libra - Jala; Aries, Leo and Scorpio-Agni;
Capricorn and Aquarius - Vayu; and Sagittarius and Pisces - Akasa.
Refrain. 49. In Sarvasiddhi, it is expressed that the Bhutas should be named given in section 47.
If the asterism of both turns out to be indeed the very same Bhuta, it is propitious. In the event
that one is blazing and the other watery, it is terrible. Different blends are acceptable.
Rajju
Verse 50. Arrange the asterisms into three gatherings of nine each as given underneath:

First group 2nd gronp 3rd group
Aswini

Bharani Krittika

Aridra

Mrigasira

Punarvasu

Pushyami Aslesha

Uttara

Pubba

Makha

Hasta

Chitta

Swati

Rohini

 Jyeshta

Anuradha

Moola

Poorvasbadha

Satabhisha
Poorvabhadra

Dhanishta

Visakha
Uttarashadha

Sravana

Uttarabhadra

Revati.

Assuming that the asterisms of the couple end up falling in a similar gathering, the burdening of
the couple should not be finished.
NOTES
Assuming the asterisms of the couple end up falling in the subsequent gathering, it is called
Madhyama Rajju and the outcome will be demise, squabble, and less and consequently this
should be exceptionally foreboding.
Assuming the asterisms fall in the first and the third, it is called Rajju and it additionally cause
disasters.
Vayanukulya (Age)
Refrain 51. Assuming the groom is multiple times more seasoned than the lady, it is considered
as great; on the off chance that he is two times old, it is acceptable; assuming he is more
established simply by a couple of years it brings about distress. In the event that the lady of the
hour is more established, the family will become terminated.
Ashtavarganukulya

Verse 52. In the event that the Janma Rasi of the kid falls in a sign which, in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga of the young lady's diagram, has more bindus it is great. Correspondingly
assuming the Janma Rasi of the young lady falls in a sign which, in the Moon's Ashtakavarga of
the kid, has more bindus, it is similarly great.

Verse 53. Discover the kaksha in which the Moon is found in the young lady's horoscope.
Assuming the Janma Rasi of the kid falls in the indication of the master of this kaksha, the
similarity is great. The equivalent is the situation in regard of the kid's horoscope.
NOTES
As indicated by the Ashtakavarga conspire, each sign is separated into 8 sections or kakshas of
3° 45', the masters of which are individually Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the
Moon and the ascendant. Assume in the lady's case the Moon is in Aquarius 11° 40'. This will be
the fourth kaksha, the master of which is the Sun. In the event that the man of the hour's Jan in a
Rasi falls in the sign controlled by the Sun, viz., Leo, it is great.
Chittanukulya

 Refrain 54. Assuming the couple love one another, they can go into wedlock, regardless of
whether there is no arrangement in alternate ways. This is vital in the question of marriage.
Refrain 55. One who cherishes a young lady truly, from his heart ought to wed her.
Unadulterated love is more noteworthy than some other ideals.
NOTES
Refrains 55 and 56 are interesting and mirror the insight of the people of old in giving need to
common love in inclination to some other celestial variable. However, the affection for one
another should spring from their souls and not from simply easygoing craving. Whenever such
unadulterated love is seen between a kid and a young lady, no mysterious thought ought to
intercede to forestall such a marriage. However, in the advanced times, besides in extremely
interesting cases, it isn't love that appears to gauge. It is desire which is transient and vanishes
the second introductory fixation closes. Consequently we see today quite a few misfortunes
including youngsters and ladies.

Different Considerations
Verse 56. Count from the asterism of the young lady to that of the kid. Duplicate this number by
5 and separation the item by 7. The rest of vyaya or use. On the off chance that the counting is
again produced using the birth-star of the groom and a similar interaction rehashed, the rest of
'aya' or gain or pay.
Refrain 57. Assuming pay is more noteworthy than consumption, marriage acquires all over
flourishing. Assuming cost is more noteworthy, the couple will encounter a lot of neediness.
Verse 58. Count from Aswini to the asterism of the kid as well as the young lady and all out
them up. Add to this aggregate 13. From the absolute figure deduct 32. Partition the distinction
by 5.

In the event that the rest of 1, the outcome is, aquisition of youngsters; 2, demise of one of the
couple; 3, delayed sickness; and 4, thriving. In the event that the absolute in the wake of adding
13 doesn't come to 32, then, at that point, the counting ought to be produced using the birth
asterism to Aswini.
Verse 59. Count from the birth asterisms of the couple to Aswini. Add the two figures and
deduct the total by 5. Assuming the rest of 1, flourishing is demonstrated; if 2, general
advancement; if 3, cataclysms; if 4, procurement of abundance and if 5, calamities.
NOTES
It is held by some that the rule given in this refrain just to the Chola country.
Verse 60. Assuming that the birth stars of the male and female fall in the first varga - Aridra,
Hasta, Poorva-shadha, Uttarashadha - there will be extraordinary advancement; on the off chance
that they fall in the second varga - Krittika, Rohini, Mrrgasira, Makha, Pubba, Uttara, Anuradha,
Jyeshta, Moola, Dhanishta, Satabhisha, Poorva-bhadra - thriving will follow; and in the event

 that they fall in the third varga - Aswini, Bharani, Punarvasu, Pusbyami, Aslesha, Chitta, Swati,
Visakha, Uttarashadha, Sravana, Revati - use and obligations will come in.
NOTES With this verse closes Rinanukulya.
Verse 61. The anukulyas (wellsprings of arrangement) portrayed here are exceptionally powerful
in outcomes. The impacts of some of them are portrayed somewhere else and they are noted
underneath.
Refrain 62. Dina understanding demonstrates that the couple will live lengthy; mahendra
acquires kids and amazing kids; streedeergha gives the spouse long life; yoni gives unfailing
flourishing; gana makes the couple commonly increasingly connected; and vayas (age) gets
association and more prominent friendship.
Verse 63. Of the different compatibilities depicted, 4 depend on Janma Rasi and one each onthe
ruler of the Janma Rasi, sakti (love) and vayas (age); and 16 depend on the asterisms.
Consequently we have 23 things or wellsprings of understanding altogether.
Verse 64. Of the compatibilities proposed over, some are solid and others are frail.
Refrain 65. Their general significance should be noted. As indicated by the work
Sarvartha-siddhi, 20 things of compatibilities are to be investigated. Of these, arrangement in
regard of Janma Rasi, master of Janma Rasi, Vasya, Mahendra and Yoni are the most significant.
Thus these ought to be painstakingly examined.
Verse 66. For wedding purposes the main things of concordance to be considered are Janma
Rasi, master of Janma Rasi, Vasya, Mahendra, Gana, Yoni, Dina and Streedeergha.
Refrain 67. As per Muhurthabharana, Janma Rasi, ruler of Janma Rasi, Mahendra, Yoni and
Vasya are the five most significant wellsprings of arrangement that ought to be thought of.
Verse 68. Madhava gives 15 things for thought taking all things together. Of these Mahendra,
Yoni, Janma Rasi, ruler of Janma Rasi are the main ones. Plus, Brahmins should investigate the
Gotras they are brought into the world in. Others ought to consider the understanding in regard
of Varna other than the five previously referenced.
Refrain 69. Five things of understanding, viz., Vasya, Mahendra, Yoni, Janma Rasi and master
of Janma Rasi have been viewed as extremely powerful by experience by many learned
journalists regarding the matter. Subsequently, basically these five ought to be investigated
before the settlement of the marriage is made. Other than these, Brahmins should investigate
their Gotras, and different ranks (Varnas), these being extraordinary to them.

NOTES
The subject of a concordance in the question of marriage has been extravagantly depicted,
offering the viewpoints of other notable specialists. Truth be told the creator gives 23 things for
thought. In any case, in this section he is adequately pragmatic to recommend that something like
five things are vital and they ought to be investigated before the settlement of marriage is made.

 With due respect to the extraordinary creator I should record my modest contrast from him. This
large number of things depend either on the birth star or birth Rasi. In genuine practice,
nonetheless, I feel that inborn similarity should exist in the horoscopes of the male and female
assuming the marriage is to be fruitful. The creator doesn't apportion any unit for the different
Kootas as has been done in chips away at Muhurtha. I recognize to my regarded perusers the
section on Marriage given in my book Muhurtha or Electional Astrology, wherein the subject has
been talked about exhaustively.

Impacts of Transits

Verse 1. Varaha Mihira has definite the impacts of planets on the way in his work Brihat
Samhita. I will depict here momentarily what is given by him in that popular composition.
Refrain 2. At the point when the Sun travels the Janma Rasi (the sign involved by the Moon
upon entering the world), weakness, loss of good name and position, agonizing work and
illnesses torment the local; in the second, deficiency of cash, infections in the eye, and double
dealing from others occur; in the third, one will encounter height to another position, ruin to
one's adversaries, increment of riches and great wellbeing; in the fourth, he will meet with
deterrents in the question of partaking in the organization of his better half and will experience
the ill effects of sicknesses in the stomach.
Verse 3. In the fifth, hardship from adversaries, and sicknesses; in the sixth, recuperation from
ailment, fall of foes and assuagement of every psychological misery; in the seventh, weariness
from excursions, weakness and infections associated with the stomach; in the eighth repugnance
for ladies and from ladies and dread from the rulers and illnesses.
Refrain 4. In the ninth, disasters of different types, sensations of privation and extreme
infections, and break to one's calling; in the tenth accomplishment in all endeavors and triumph
in all quarters; in the eleventh, advancement to a raised position, general flourishing,
recuperation from illnesses and propensity to do great activities; and in the twelfth, the local can
not harvest the products of any great activities.
Refrain 5. At the point when the Moon travels his own extreme position, he acquires healthy
food agreeable to him, expanded bed solace and gain of significant things; in the second, the
Moon makes inconveniences or hindrances generally great activities, loss of acclaim, and cash;
in the third, happiness with ladies, solace from having great garments and new procurement of
abundance; in the fourth, dread from others; and in the fifth inconveniences, all things
considered, obstacle to ventures.
Verse 6. In the sixth addition of abundance, general bliss, harmony with foes and assuagement of
all infections; in the seventh, healthy and good food, presents from others, gain of cash,
agreeable rest and happiness regarding ladies; in the eighth difficulty from fire; in the ninth
sicknesses in the stomach and anxiety toward detainment; in the tenth, benefits from
Government; in the eleventh visits from family members and increment of riches; and in the
twelfth, deficiency of cash and obstructions to all work.

 Refrain 7. At the point when Mars travels the birth Moon, deterrents to all endeavors; in the
second, dread from rulers, inconveniences from hoodlums and fire, distresses brought about by
foes, weaknesses in the body brought about by mental and actual pains; in the third, gain of
important metals, favor of God Subrahmanya and simple obliteration of adversaries; in the
fourth, relationship with awful men, illnesses in the stomach, high fever, oblivious progression of
fundamental liquid.
Refrain 8. In the fifth, Mars gives inconveniences from adversaries, distresses because of kids,
and fear from infections; in the sixth, gain of significant metals as copper and gold, dread from
fights and errors, new breaks with foes; in the seventh, misconception with the spouse, illnesses
in the stomach and eyes; in the eighth, circulatory strain because of serious blows in the body or
break of appendages and ensuing sicknesses, dread from disrespect, mental sadness.
Verse 9. In the ninth, deficiency of cash, sicknesses and rout; in the tenth, benefits in all ways; in
the eleventh, rise to the headship of a town and general bliss; and in the twelfth, inconveniences,
everything being equal, misuse of cash, infections because of hotness, circulatory strain and
illnesses in the eye.
Verse 10. Whenever Mercury travels the extreme Moon, it demonstrates fights and false
impressions with relations, deficiency of cash brought about by slander or unlawful words and
works and excursions to far off places; in the second, new securing of riches and impact and
general success; in the third dread from adversaries and outrage of rulers; in the fourth, gain of
cash, thriving to family members and general advancement of family; in the fifth, squabbles with
spouse and kids.
Verses 11 and 12. Mercury traveling the sixth shows accomplishment regardless, general karma
and fast advancement; in the seventh, squabbles: in the eighth, triumph, bliss from youngsters,
gain of garments, increment of pay, mental harmony and increment of learning; in the ninth,
infections of various types; in the tenth, obliteration of adversaries, gain of cash and satisfaction
from ladies; in the eleventh great discourse, new gains, joy and achievement in all things, better
and closer relationship with spouse and kids; and in the twelfth, inconveniences from enemies
and illnesses.
Verse 13. Jupiter traveling the birth Moon includes deficiency of cash, depromotion, squabbles
and mental downfall; in the second, gain of riches, ruin to adversaries, satisfaction with ladies; in
the third, some adjustment of calling, hindrances to all activities; in the fourth, distresses brought
about by family members, need of harmony from all quarters; in the fifth, securing of vehicles as
ponies or bulls, gain of decorations and youngsters, joy from ladies, gain of garments, and
abiding houses; in the sixth, inclination to feel troubled however having everything to make one
agreeable.
NOTES
Vehicles as ponies or bulls infer by horse-carriages or trucks drawn by bulls.
Refrain 14. In the seventh, from revolutionary Moon Jupiter acquires shrewdness in discourse,
sharpness of knowledge, achievement of all activities and gain of cash, satisfaction in sexual
delights; in the eighth, agonizing melancholy, sicknesses, loss of freedom, over-effort and
exhaustion; in the ninth, benefits, joy with spouse and youngsters, securing of power and

 achievements and accomplishment in all activities; in the tenth, loss of position or calling, riches
and unprofitability, everything being equal.
Refrain 15. Jupiter traveling in the eleventh, shows favors, achievement in all activities and
height to a distinghished station throughout everyday life; and in the twelfth, weariness brought
about by lengthy strolls and serious torments throughout everyday life.
Refrain 16. Venus traveling the natal Moon signifies getting healthy food, delight with spouse,
gain of perfumed articles, crisp resting materials and significant garments and bliss coming about
because of these.
Refrain 17. Venus in the second gives riches and grains, obtaining of trimmings and blossoms,
favor of rulers and joy for the relatives; in the third, regard and respect for one's perspectives,
benefits, praises from others, procurement of garments and obliteration of foes; and in the fourth,
blissful compromise with family members and extraordinary success.
Refrain 18. Venus traveling the fifth demonstrates gain of cash, birth of youngsters, help from
family members, fulfillment for the elderly folks; in the sixth, inconveniences from foes and
illnesses; in the seventh, inconvenience and risk from ladies; in the eighth, bliss coming about
because of ladies, securing of family utensils and decorations in the family; in the ninth increase
of abundance, realization of liberal and altruistic activities and satisfaction and happiness with
ladies.
Refrain 19. Venus traveling the tenth causes competition and fights and disrespect; in the
eleventh delight in great food, gain of perfumed articles and favor from family members; and in
the twelfth, gain of abundance in numerous ways and securing of garments and trimmings.
Verse 20. Saturn traveling birth Moon causes dread from toxic substance and fire, loss of family
members and companions, exile to far off lands, squabbles with one's own family members,
misconceptions because of money related exchanges and excursions to far off places.
Refrain 21. Saturn in the second, loss of riches, satisfaction and wellbeing; abatement of wants;
in the third, gain of elephants, bison, great wellbeing and fruitful end, all things considered.
Refrain 22. Saturn in the fourth acquires a cloud to the brain, partition from spouse and one's
own riches; fights with all; in the fifth, distresses emerging from death of kids.
Verse 23. In the sixth, mollification of adversaries and illnesses; in the seventh, closeness with
female workers and far off ventures; in the eighth misconception with one's own kin and
outrageous defenselessness. Saturn in the ninth, enemity with all, detainment or servitude, block
to one's beneficent activities and heart inconvenience; in the tenth, loss of notoriety, abundance
what's more schooling, and achievement in one's activities (Karma Phala).
Refrain 24. Saturn in the eleventh, closeness with different ladies, enormous benefits, increment
of honor and authority; and in the twelfth, progression of discontinuous distresses and
overpowering cataclysms throughout everyday life.
Refrain 25. Planets over their travel contribute both great and evil to the local. Yet, they might
be made to accomplish something beneficial by satisfaction, contributions, and so on.
Verse 26. The Sun and Mars give their travel impacts when they are in the start of the sign;

 Jupiter and Venus in the center part; and the Moon and Saturn in the last part. Mercury offers his
belongings all through the hint.
NOTES
While considering the travels one needs to take note of that troublesome planets when aspected
by benefics are not detestable completely. Also well arranged planets when aspected by malefics
don't cause great completely. If the significant planets, while on the way, conjoin or viewpoint
the decision Dasa or Bhukti master, the great impacts of the directional rulers are increased or
postponed and the terrible impacts heightened or reduced relying on the idea of the traveling
planet. In the event that, for instance, one is having the sub-time of a yogakaraka planet, Saturn
on the way aspecting or partner the sub-ruler can postpone the activity of the Rajayoga.
Verse 27. On the off chance that planets on the way are antagonistic, they ought to be satisfied
by revering them with blossoms of different tints proper to the planets, by wearing clothing of
the shades of the planets consequently: Sun and Mars - red; the Moon and Venus - white; Saturn
- dull; Jupiter - yellow; and Mercury - green; and by presenting the mantras of the planets and
performing Homa.
Verse 28. We will presently show the idea of the gems or valuable stones, represented by the
different planets, things that are to be presented in cause, the idea of the services to be performed
and what to be kept away from, when planets on the way are in horrible positions.
Refrain 29. The Sun administers - manikya, the Moon - mukta, Mars - vidruma, Mercury garuda, Jupiter - pushyaraga, Venus - vajra, Satmn - indra-neela, Rahu - gomedhika and Ketu vaidurya.
Refrain 30. At the point when the Sun is in negative travel position, gift a cow of kapila shading;
for the Moon, a conch; for Mars, a red bull; for Mercury, gold; for Jupiter, yellow silk; for Venus
silver and white pony; for Saturn, a dark cow; for Rahu iron and sheep; for Ketu, an elephant and
sheep.
Verse 31. Devas and Brahmanas will be embellished. Old people ought to be complied. Vedas
and Puranas ought to be paid attention to. Homas ought to be performed and seen. The brain
ought to be kept unadulterated. Vedic serenades ought to be paid attention to and gifts offered, as
appointed. Assuming these are done, horrible planets, notwithstanding how beset they might be,
will accomplish something useful.
Verse 32. The planets on the way in horrible spots won't cause any damage if one hotels to
cleaning up each day, turning to formal showers as appointed by Badarayana; by having plunges
in heavenly waters and pouring on the body sedated waters of the fitting planet.
Verse 33. Indeed, even a ruler ought to stay away from the accompanying when the planets are
negative: Roaming during unprecedented and late hours; participating in hunting; pronouncing
war and undertaking any hazardous activity; leaving on far off ventures; riding on elephants,
ponies and other perilous vehicles; and visiting another's home.
Refrain 34. For deciphering the impacts of travels, three variables must be thought of, viz., the
travel circumstance, vedha and vepareeta vedha.

 Verse 35. Set up the Ashtakavargas of the relative multitude of planets and imprint the good
situations from the Moon in each. They are called Gochara. At the point when a planet involves a
Gochara position, its belongings can be invalidated by another planet possessing a Vedha Rasi
from the abovementioned. Henceforth its great impacts will be incredibly diminished. At the
point when a planet possesses a Vedha position in regard of one more planet on the way, the
impacts of the planet involving a Vedha will be contrarily invalidated by the planet in Gochara
position. This is known as Vipareeta Vedha. Thus the insidious impacts likewise will be
significantly limited.
Verse 36. All planets traveling, the eleventh from the natal Moon, do just great. The Sun is ideal
in 3, 6 and 10; Saturn is great in 3 and 6; Mars in 1, 3, 6, 7 and 10;
Venus in all spots aside from 6, 7 and 10; Jupiter in 2, 5, 7 and 9; Mercury in 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10;
planets ought not be burdened by a planet involving Vedha positions. This is the perspective on
Sreepathi.
Verse 37. Whenever the Sun travels 11, 3, 10, 6 (note the request) from the natal Moon and
when no vedha is brought about by different planets with the exception of Saturn involving 5, 9,
4, 12 (note the request), the Sun does just great.
NOTES
At the point when the Sun travels 11, 3, 10, and 6, the Vedha position of 11 is 5, of 3 is 9, of 10
is 4, of 6 is 12. In the event that a planet involves its Vedha position, the planet on the way
position Will be tormented.
Refrain 38. At the point when the Moon travels 7, 1, 6, 11, 10, 3 and when no planets with the
exception of Mercury possess 2, 5, 12, 8, 9, 4 (in this specific request) he does just great.

NOTES
Mercury doesn't cause vedha to the Moon. The vedha positions for 7 is 2, for 1 - 5, for 6 - 12, for
11 - 8, for 10 - 9, for 3 - 4.
Refrain 39. At the point when Mars travels 3, 11, 6 and no other planet involves its Vedha
positions - 12, 5, 9, he does just great. Saturn is like Mars.
Refrain 40. At the point when Mercury travels 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11 and no planets with the
exception of the Moon possess 5, 3, 9, 1, 8 and 11, he gives just great. The Moon doesn't cause
Vedha.
Verse 41. Whenever Jupiter travels 2, 11, 9, 5, 8 and no other planet travels 12, 8, 10, 4, 3 for
Vedha torment, he does just great.
Refrain 42. At the point when Venus involves on the way 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12 and 11, and no
other planet possesses 8, 7, 1, 10, 9, 5, 11, 6, 3 and cause Vedha, he does just great.
Refrain 43. Assuming traveling planets are beset by Vedha, they don't give great impacts.
Comparably a planet in a negative and Vedha position counter-besetting one more planet in
Vedha Rasi contributes just great. In Vipareeta Vedha, we have Vama Vedha.

 Refrain 44. Regardless of whether a planet travels an ideal sign, he doesn't be beneficial
assuming he possesses an unfriendly or weakness sign or is related with or aspected by an
antagonistic planet.
Refrain 45. The planets in Gochara positions are impacted distinctively by Vedha and Vipareeta
Vedha. These are nitty gritty in another works and they are winnowed in for making the realities
more clear.
Refrain 46. At the point when the Sun travels a Vedbya sign (3, 6, 10, 11) the Vedha signs are in
request 9, 12, 4, 5.

NOTES
Assuming that the Sun travels the third from the natal Moon, the Vedha sign is 9. Likewise for 6
it is 12, for 10 it is 4 and for 11 it is 5. Whenever the Sun is going through the third (Vedhya)
from the extreme Moon, he is to give benefic outcomes. If simultaneously a planet travels the
ninth (Vedha) from the extreme Moon, the Sun's great outcomes are nullified.
Refrain 47. For the Moon the Vedhya and the Vedha signs are 1 - 5, 3 - 9, 6 - 12, 1 - 2, 10 - 4
and 11 - 8.
NOTES
Assuming the travel Moon is in the third (Vedhya) from the natal Moon, it can give great
outcomes. Assuming that at the same time another planet is traveling the ninth (Vedha), the great
impacts are invalidated.
Verse 48. For Mars and Saturn, the Vedhya and Vedha Rasis are 3-12, 6-9 and 11- 5.
Refrain 49. For Mercury Vedhya and Vedha signs are 2-5, 4-7, 6-9, 8-1, 10-8 and 11- 12. For
Jupiter 2-12, 5-4, 9-10, 7-3 and 11-8.
Refrain 50. For Venus the Vedhya and Vedha signs are 2-7, 3-1, 4-10, 5-9, 8-5, 9-4, 11- 12 and
12-6.
Refrain 51. The Vedhya positions for Rahu and Ketu are 3, 6, and 11 with respect to Saturn and
the Vedha positions are 12, 9, 5. No planet having Vedha can give valuable outcomes.
Refrain 52. Saturn doesn't make Vedha the Sun nor does the Sun burden Saturn.
Comparably the Moon and Mercury are not afflictive together.
Refrain 53. Regardless of whether planets involve great Gochara positions, they don't contribute
great assuming they are distressed by Vedha. Also, however the Vedha sign might be horrible, a
planet arranged there being counter-distressed by a planet possessing its Vedha Rasi does no
detestable except for offers just great.
Refrain 54. In the event that a celestial prophet not knowing the standards of Vedha, Vipareeta
Vedha and strength of planets makes strong to foresee the Gochara impacts, his expectations
won't ever materialized to acts.

 Refrain 55. In this section, we have portrayed the impacts of planets on the way counting from
the Moon. This is given out by the incomparable Sage Vasishta to his students, and it ought not
be encouraged to any aside from great understudies. This is to be loved as an extraordinary
mystery.

Sicknesses: Causes and Remedies

Refrain 1. Illnesses have been managed by me in Chapter XIII. I will presently depict the
essential drivers of sicknesses and medicinal measures as given in the work Karma Vipaka.
NOTES
As indicated by antiquated Hindu originations particular kinds of illnesses like tuberculosis,
malignant growth, and so forth,, are Karma Vyadhis being the outcomes of specific disallowed
acts which the local probably done in his previous existence. The Western clinical men attempt
to find for each illness causes inside the body, and they are treated by drugs, medical procedure,
and so forth, most of Hindus anyway still have faith in the antiquated hypothesis of our
affliction, physical, mental, and so on, in this life, being the outcome of specific demonstrations
done in our past everyday routine or experiences. Karma Vipaka is an antiquated work posting
the different illnesses, how they emerge and what medicinal measures, which basically comprise
of japa, homa, dana, and so on, ought to be embraced. Western clinical science has not said and
can't say the final word on infirmity and its mending. We need to consider what the sages say
with deference and confidence.
Rajayakshma (Consumption)
Refrain 2. The justification behind the horrendous sickness utilization is that in the past birth,
the local could have made savagery Brahmins, despised the preceptors and elderly folks or could
have enjoyed sexual delight at the hours of obscurations. The cures are reciting the Sahasra
Nama, Rudra Sukta, Aindragni and Suktas joined by Havana; and giving garments as gifts.
Karsya (Emaciation)
Refrain 3. As per smritis taking food is the primary driver for karsya or anorexia. As a
therapeutic measure, a picture of Siva ought to be gifted.
Kushta Roga (Leprosy)
Verse 4. The essential driver of sickness can be found in killing Brahmins, partaking in the
spouse of the preceptor, participating in unlawful offer of meds or endeavoring to harm a
confided face to face. The medicinal measures are: reciting rudra sukta, ayusukta and giving the
pictures of the Sun and the bull made of gold to admired Brahmins and performing kushmanda
homa.
Swetakushta (White uncleanliness)
Refrain 5. Other than the causes determined in the past verse, misappropriation of huge amounts

 of cotton rolls, garments and bronze vessels will likewise prompt one experiencing white
infection.
Medicinal measures are likewise equivalent to given in refrain 4.

Visarpa (Serpis)
Verse 6. Killing snakes or having them killed by others is the best reason for one experiencing
Visarpa. The cure is nagadana or giving the picture of a snake as determined in the smritis.
Pandu Roga (Leucoderma)
Verse 7. Taking the abundance of the Deities and Brahmins and eating illegal food varieties lead
to leucoderma. Execution of kushmanda homa and giving of gold are the palliatives.
Atisara (Dysentery)
Refrain 8. Obliterating tanks and wells is the reason for Atisara. The cure according to sages is
the recitation of Rudrasukta and Varunasukta.
Grahani (Face Disease)
Refrain 9. Tearing away the lips, splitting the teeth and removing the tongues of others;
discussing and disparaingly of older people; expressing misrepresentation and turning into a
misleading observer are the reasons for illness in the face. The cures are Kushmanda homa,
Gayatri Japa and giving in foundation a gold figure of the elephant, grains and drugs.
Arsa Roga (Piles)
Refrain 10. The reasons for heaps are abusing of the abundance of the learned and the visually
impaired; taking food, having intercourse relations on restricted days and killing cows. The cure
is the giving of the figure of a cow made of gold.
Netra Roga (Eye Disease)
Verse 11. Eye illnesses are the outcome of thoughtlessness, projecting wily looks at different
ladies and harming others' eyes. The cures are giving payasa arranged with milk or dhal, gold,
ghee and giving the figure of Garuda and execution of Homas and reciting Netra-raksha sukta or
Netraraksha mantra with dedication.
Nakandhya (Partial Blindness)
Verse 12. The sickness of nakandhya is because of the harming or blinding of cow's eyes.
The cures are, giving in cause the picture of Gopala.
Kama Roga (Ear Disease)
Refrain 13. Slandering, tearing away others' ears and blocking others' activities are supposed to
be the reasons for Karnaroga. Giving in foundation land, gold, grains and woolen products and
reciting Surya Mantra are the palliatives.
Jihwa Roga (Lingual Disease)

 Verse 14. The foundations for lingual infection are reproving preceptors and older people,
articulating lie, making distress others, tearing away others' tongues. Giving grains, medications,
performing kushmanda homa and reciting Rahu mantra or other Suktas are the cures.
Vatha Roga (Rheumatism)
Refrain 15. Scrutinizing devout and good individuals, abhorring guardians and preceptors and
taking food are the foundations for ailment. The medicinal measures are giving in foundation the
picture of a deer made of copper alongside garments and healthy food and presenting or reciting
Vayu Sukta and other Vayu Mantras.
Soola (Colic Trouble)
Verse 16. Having relations with virgins, creatures, widows and house keeper workers; eating
denied food, leaving the presentation of fundamental ceremonies, enjoying defaming, killing an
individual by toxic substance or sharp weapon are the underlying drivers for colic
inconveniences. The cures are thila dana and padma dana and giving away a pike made of silver
or gold.
Gulma (Spleen Disease)
Refrain 17. Firmly established ill will towards and abuse of the preceptor, jealousy and abuse of
another's food are the primary driver for the illness Gulma. The cures are Homa with Aindragnisukta, reciting of Rudrasukta and Vayusukta, reciting of Gayatri Mantra and giving of the picture
of Ganapati.
Prameha
Verse 18. Sexual relations with creatures, unmarried virgins, spouses of preceptors and widows,
scorn of instructors, taking of food from Brahmins and making distress others are the reasons for
Prameha. Other than these, unlawful relations with mother, mother by marriage and sibling's
better half reason madhu meha or diabetes.
Refrain 19. Homas and giving of gold, cow, water and food and reciting of varuna mantra free
one from diabetes.
Mahodara (Dropsy)
Refrain 20. The reason for this sickness is sex relations with the spouse of the preceptor and
causing of fetus removals. The cures are reciting Rudra sukta and Varunasukta and giving in
foundation the picture of a crocodile and water.
Mootra Krucha (Urinary Disease)
Verse 21. Actual closeness with unmarried virgins, creatures and widows and abusing Brahmins
are the primary driver for urinary infections. The cures are giving gingelly seeds and lotus
blossoms. Performing 'Homas' with deficient fire prompts Agnimandya. The palliative is the
reciting of Agnimantra.
Bhagandara (Fistula)
Refrain 22. Ignoring the exhortation of older folks and preceptors and sex-relations with the

 spouse of the preceptor cause Bhagandara-The cures are giving gems, silver, gold and picture of
an elephant made of gold and reciting Gayatri mantra, Aditya-sukta and Rudrasukta.
Vidhradhi
Refrain 23. Taking natural products is the reason for Vidhradhi roga. The cures are performing
amradana asper the orders of Smritis.
Kantha Roga (Throat Disease)
Refrain 24. Taking public prosperty brings about one experiencing throat infection.
Grahasanti and giving ratnas are the cures.

Siro Roga (Headache)

 Verse 25. The reason for illness of the head is scorn towards Brahmins. The cures are repentence
and giving of the holy string.
Asrugadhara
Verse 26. This illness is brought about by obliterating Aswatha and other sacrosanct trees and
harming cows. The cure comprises of giving a red cow.
Apasmara (Epilepsy)
Refrain 27. The reason for Apasmara is the killing of preceptors and bosses. Japa, Dana and
different measures suggested in Smritis of the sages are the cures.
Mookathwa and Unmada (Dumbness and Insanity)
Verse 28. Mocking older people, consistently engaged in joys and taking a gander at others'
spouses and breaking of guarantees lead to idiocy, lunacy and so forth The cures proposed are
giving of an elephant picture.
Fevers
Verse 29. Fevers emerging from cold and heat and repeating fevers are brought about by
threatening others with the assistance of a canine. Cures are the exhibition of Abhisheka for
Vishnu and Siva and reciting of Panchadurgamantra and Rudrasukta.
NOTES
For fevers emerging from cold and hotness Abhisheka of Siva and Vishnu are supposed to be
more suitable. For discontinuous fevers cures other than the two referenced here are suggested.
Daha (Thirst)
Verse 30. Daha or outrageous thirst emerges on account of sins like closeness with the
preceptor's significant other. The cure is giving water to the parched.
Vrana Roga (Ulcers)
Verse 31. Taking vegetables, impeding others' discourses, abusing others and indecent
relationship with bothersome ladies and obliterating trees lead to ulcers. The cure is giving Ratna
or pearls or valuable ring.
Ulcers in the hands and the legs
Verse 32. Ulcers in the hands and legs are separately because of causing early termination and
having shameless relationship with the preceptor's significant other. Giving Ratna as a gift to
Brahmins is the cure.

Childlessness
Verse 33. The foundations for one getting no issues are: killing kids, eating eggs, detesting
preceptors and others' youngsters, killing creatures, causing discords among mother and kid,
killing youthful pet creatures and not playing out the yearly sraddha function. The cure is giving

 a cow's picture made of gold.
Aruchi and Chardhi
Refrain 34. Giving in cause anything without due respect and commitment will prompt an
illness known as "Aruchi". Deceiving an individual who believes the local will prompt an illness
known as Chardhi. Allow learned men to propose reasonable solutions for these two.
Mookatwa (Dumbness)
Refrain 35. Copyright infringement prompts the sickness of muteness. The cure is giving the
picture of Goddess Saraswati.
Kamila (Blindness)
Refrain 36. The reason for the infection 'Kamila' (visual deficiency) is taking food without
cleaning up. Giving the picture of Garuda is the cure.
Anthra Vriddhi (Intestinal Trouble)
Refrain 37. Deterring the exhibition of Yagna brings about this illness. Giving the picture of
Vishnu is the fitting cure.
Verse 38. For the illness Gulma iron vessels ought to be gifted; for infection, silver coins and
pictures; for Vatha roga (ailment) cow's milk; for eye sicknesses, gold coins inundated in cow's
ghee; for torments in the body - beds, pads and bunks; for infections in the stomach - fruitful
plots of ground.
Verse 39. For Arsas (heaps) and Bhagandhara (fistula), gold and jewels ought to be talented and
Rudrasukta recited. For all sicknesses, other than the extraordinary ones suggested in their
appropriate spots, Sahasranama, Satarudreeya and Rudrasukta ought to be recited.
Verse 40. Rulers and rich individuals ought to lay out free clinics. Standard individuals ought to
at minimum give food and drugs to the debilitated. Then, at that point, their afflictions will
vanish.

Refrain 41. The 'endowment of wellbeing' is the most significant of the multitude of gifts. To be
liberated from illnesses and be solid he should assist the wiped out with food and prescriptions.

Questions bearing on Deities, Rulers and so forth

Verse 1. In this part I will depict Deva Prasna (divinities), Raja Prasna (rulers), Yuddha Prasna
(war) and Mrigaya Prasna (hunting), four altogether.
Verse 2. The establishment of the blessed icon should be done consequently: The cleric is to
situate himself in an endorsed heavenly spot and perform atma pooja after due contemplation.
Then, at that point, he should adore his preceptor and Ganapati and give as gifts to Brahmins
gold, garments and cows. The heavenly icon ought to be introduced at the most promising time.

 NOTES
For the most part, the establishment of the icon is finished by Than-trikas. Self-cleansing and
love of the holiness inside himself and afterward the love of his Guru and god Ganapati by the
minister ought to go before the conventional establishment right now prior fixed on prophetic
contemplations.
Verse 3. After the establishment of the icon the presentation of Abhishekha and Utsava ought to
be led. This Utsava is to be rehashed each year either on the establishment day or on some other
promising day appropriately fixed. A cautious festival of the Utsava gets thriving.
Verse 4. God exists in the heavenly icon as an imperceptible power to favor His lovers. This
'undetectable power' or Chaitanya is the interminable wellspring of thriving to His Bhaktas or
lovers. Assuming it is found that for reasons unknown or other, this Chaitanya is viewed as
diminishing, appropriate medicinal measures ought to be embraced to reestablish things to their
typical condition.
Verses 5, 6, 7. Coming up next are said to impede 'the Divine Presence' in the bimba or the
introduced symbol.
(1) Births and passings occurring inside the four dividers of the sanctuary;
(2) Passing of the calls of nature inside angana and mantapa; (3) the section of precluded
individuals; (4) the passage of creatures like owls, birds, crows, canines, asses, camels, pigs,
chimps, 'dundubha' and 'purassara'; (5) the presence of snake-openings, ant colonies and bee
colonies; (6) any indications of pain or happiness and 'sweat and sweat' in the bimba; (7) the
symbol gets warmed or it jerks forward and backward or it tumbles down, or its various parts
become broken or leave request; (8) pujas and different services are halted for not a great
explanation; (9) love with disallowed mantras or prohibited blossoms is being done; or (10)
scouring the icon with pepper. Of these, some are extremely amazing enemies of powers and
some are yery frail.
Refrain 8. 'Prasada' is the Body of God. 'Bimba' is the seat of Sukshma Delia'. 'Prasada' is
'Adhara'. Bimba is 'Adheya'. Mischief to one influences the other. In the event that any issue is
seen as in any of these, both ought to be refined. Assuming that any confusion is seen as outside
these (however inside the four dividers of the sanctuary), purificatory functions ought to be
performed. Assuming there is no not kidding dosha it is sufficient assuming that the spot is
sprinkled with the heavenly water that remaining parts after Kalasabhisheka.
Refrain 9. Assuming there is any not kidding problem for the Bimba or Prasada or other
auxiliary parts, it ought to be fixed without a moment's delay. Any other way, the adequacy of
the 'Presence' will be especially impacted and catastrophes will occur for. On the off chance that
the problems are fixed, Divine blessing will shower on all.
Verse 10. First the icon ought to be introduced at a propitious hour. Then, at that point, the
standard love ought to be performed consistently. The yearly celebrations ought to be led in a
customary manner. On the off chance that there is any issue or disengagement to the Bimba and
any piece of the sanctuary, it ought to be fixed without a moment's delay. Then, at that point, the
Deity will give thriving by His heavenly presence.

 Refrain 11. Deva Prasna should be depended on, to determine the reason for messiness, the
unexpected stoppage, or execution of the customs or utsava in an upside down way, execution of
any demonstrations which may-have obliterated the holiness of the Deity and the decrease in the
pay of the sanctuary, thinking about the pertinent houses in the horary outline.
Verse 12. On the off chance that the ascendant is involved or aspected by the Sun or the Sun
possesses a kendra, or Leo is the ascendant, then, at that point, the God is Siva. Assuming Cancer
is the ascendant or the Moon partners with or angles the ascendant or a kendra, then, at that
point, it is Durga.
In the event that Mars is arranged in the above way, the God is Skanda. In the event that it is
Scorpio and Mars is associated with it, it is Bhadra Kali. In the event that Saturn is likewise
arranged, the God is Sastha. Assuming that Mercury is arranged as above, it is Vishnu.
Assuming that Jupiter is having similar demeanor, all divine beings are available there.
NOTES
In the event of uncertainty concerning whether any prohibitory demonstration has impacted ihe
sacredness of the sanctuary, or the reason for messiness can't be known, or on the other hand
assuming any questions emerge with respect to whether abhicharakarma has been done to
annihilate the Divine presence, or then again assuming there is any apparent reduction in the pay
of the sanctuary or any obscure causes or imperceptible signs uncovering that there is something
off-base some place, Deva Prasana ought to be turned to.
On the off chance that the ascendant at the hour of the question is Leo, or the Sun viewpoints or
possesses the ascendant or is in a kendra from the ascendant, then, at that point, the sanctum
sanctorum lodging God Siva has been dirtied. Assuming the ascendant is Taurus or the Moon
possesses or viewpoints the ascendant or the Moon is in a kendra from the ascendant, the god
impacted is Durga. On the off chance that Mars is in basically the same manner arranged, it is
Skandha; in the event that the ascendant is Scorpio and Mars is arranged as above it is
Bhadrakali; the Deity is Sasta assuming Saturn is the planet in question. It is Vishnu assuming
ths planet is Mercury. In the event that it is Jupiter, it implies all gods.
Venus has been precluded. In any case, Tai rus and Libra can be considered as additionally the
circumstance of Venus. The god here is Annapurna or Lakshmi. Here the sections managing
divinities as given in Chapter XV can likewise be thought of.

Verse 13. In the Deva Prasna diagram the 12 houses from the ascendant show separately, the
'Heavenly presence', abundance, sanctuary workers movements, Bimba, adversaries, adornments,
contributions and oblations (naivedya), sanctuary specialists, celebrations, pay and consumption.
Verse 14. As indicated by one more power the twelve houses in a deva prasna graph connote
separately, the Bimba, the abundance of the sanctuary, naivedya or contributions, the land,
sannidhya or divine presence, messiness or contamination, the general population, sanctuary
workers, admirers, Dcvalakas, merit, the Thanthrika or Acharya.
NOTES

 There is a slight contrast in the task of implications to the twelve houses, between the thirteenth
and fourteenth refrains.
The Bimba is the god or God. Sannidhya or chaitanya is the heavenly presence. Devalakas are
people utilized in the sanctuary for making festoons, sounding drums and music and blowing
conches and horns. The 10th house means sucharitam or merit and the twelfth house administers
Thantrikas or ministers who introduce the Deity or lead love.
Refrain 15. As per another view the ascendant demonstrates the idea of Bimba; the eighth
standards workers and articles utilized for love and 'Heavenly Presence'; the ninth connotes
merit; the fourth indicates the different pieces of the sanctuary; the second implies the abundance
of the sanctuary and pay; the sixth proposes hoodlums and individuals occupied with
annihilating the sanctuary. Bhavas yield great outcomes in the event that they are aspected by or
related with benefics and underhanded outcomes assuming they are associated with malefic
planets.
Refrain 16. As per one more view, the ascendant demonstrates the sanctuary and the 8lh house
oversees Bimba. The different Bhavas are to be thought of as per the idea of the planets that
involve them or the idea of the planets who are agreeable or hostile to them.
Refrain 17. Here are given various perspectives with respect to the Bhavas in a Deva Prasna.
Accommodating this multitude of clashing perspectives, an overall report is given underneath:
Verse 18. From the ascendant is to be learned sannidhya, sanctuary building and the Bimba.
From the second house should be discovered abundance, pay, sanctuary treasure and
gatekeepers.
Refrain 19. The third house demonstrates naivedya and sanctuary workers. The fourth house
governs every one of the structures associated with the sanctuary, vehicles (vahanas) and all of
land associated with the sanctuary. The fifth house connotes 'Divine Presence' and the Bimba.
Refrains 20 to 23. The sixth house demonstrates contamination of the sanctuary, adversaries and
criminals. Individuals and decorations ought to be investigated from the seventh house. The
eighth house implies Divine Presence, naivedya and workers and great and insidious issues. The
ninth house shows the idea of the specialists and the states of the legitimacy (Punya); the tenth
house rules over day by day functions, celebrations and 'Devalakas'. The eleventh has
administration over legitimacy and thriving and pay, while the twelfth signifies consumption and
waste and nature of the clerics.
Verse 24. The ascendant and different houses involved by benefics advance the holiness of the
Bimba and different meanings. Malefics hurt or obliterate the meanings.
NOTES
The special cases on account of the sixth, eighth and twelfth houses ought to be noted.
Verse 25. On the off chance that Mars involves Bimba Bhavas (1 and 5), the symbol has a twist
or a cut. In the event that Saturn involves the house, the icon is exceptionally old. Assuming
Rahu or Gulika is in Bimba Bhava filthy creatures, like Dundubha, have contacted it. Assuming
that Ketu involves Bimba, adversaries have washed it with some restrictive powder. Assuming

 that the Sun possesses it, the Bimba has been spread with pepper salve and the viability of the
Divine Presence has been diminished. Any detestable planet in the twelfth house indicates
deformation of the picture.
Refrain 26. Saturn involving the fourth house signifies that the whole sanctuary complex is
exhausted. Mars or the Sun in the 4tb recommends that a piece of the structure has been
impacted by fire. Gulika arranged in a similar house demonstrates the passage of people in
contamination. Two malefics in the twelfth uncover that outcastes and fallen individuals have
entered the sanctuary.
NOTES
As per some papadwaya implies not two malefics, but rather Rahu and Ketu.
Refrain 27. Malefics in the third or eighth indicate that the naivedya offered is messy. Assuming
that the planet is Saturn, what is offered is insufficient. On the off chance that it is Mars
customary contributions are not made. Assuming it is Rahu or Ketu or Gulika, a few dead
creature matter has been stirred up with the naivedya.
Refrain 28, If a malefic planet involves the ninth house, it is to be deciphered that some mishap
has happened to the sanctuary specialists. The specific individual included ought to be
discovered from the asterism involved by the malefic or its threefold star. Similarly, the state of
the ministers, workers, Devalakas, and so forth, ought to be determined.

NOTES
From the twelfth house, the clerics' future can be perused: from the tenth, Devalakas; and from
the third the sanctuary workers.
Verse 29. Whenever a malefic planet is in the seventh house, a portion of the decorations of the
Deity have been lost. Assuming he involves the tenth house, the love or the Utsava (parade) isn't
by and large appropriately led.
Verse 30. Ashtabandha is to be considered from the Bimba Bhava. Assuming this is moveable,
Ashtabandha isn't solid; in the event that it is a proper sign, the Ashtabandha can be supposed to
be exceptionally solid. The strength of Ashtabandha must be perused from the fourth house too.
This is the perspective on a few learned scholars regarding the matter.
Refrain 31. To the extent that the Bimba sign is moveable or adhomuka, the icon is precarious
or has tumbled down.
Refrain 32. Benefic planets set in or aspected by the ascendant, and Jupiter involving great
houses show that the Deity is feeling ideal to favor individuals.
Refrain 33. In the event that malefics involve the ascendant and other ominous houses, it is to be
construed that the Deity is furious. The justification behind the rage relies upon the idea of the
houses involved or aspected by malefics.
Refrain 34. What is expressed before for responding to questions bearing on broad matters
might be advantageously used in Deva Prasna too.

 Refrain 35. Demise of people associated with the sanctuary and future great, and so forth, can be
perused from Sutra and Trisphuta. Assuming there are signs for death, it is to be anticipated that
creatures like cows will bite the dust falling in wells or tanks.
NOTES
Marana Sutra is determined by the blend of Bhavas. The idea of death relies upon those Bhavas.
Assuming passing signs end up being in the fourth and it is aspected by a shrewd planet
administering quadrupeds and the Bhava turns out to be a watery sign, then, at that point, we can
say that a quadruped will pass on falling in water. In the event that it is Cancer, it will be in one
year: assuming it is Scorpio, it will be in one month; and in the event that it is Pisces, it will be in
a day.
Verse 36. What is given in before parts can likewise be keenly used here. In Deva Prasna,
assuming that signs are available for deficiency of cash or indications of messiness, fitting
therapeutic measures ought to be recommended.
Verse 37. To avoid all shrewd and to achieve general success, Bhagavat-seva, Ganapati Homa,
Bhagyasukta Japa and Abhisheka with milk and its items ought to be directed in the sanctuaries
consistently.

Along these lines closes Deva Prasna and here starts Raja Prasna.

Refrain 38. On questions bearing on sovereignty, the 12 houses starting from the ascendant
connote individually the substantial elements of the lord, depository, armed force and the head of
the military, vehicles, mantra, i.e., exhortation and consultants, adversaries, the methods of
methodology to be taken on in war, age, mental disposition or strategy, authoritative work, gains
and misfortunes.
NOTES
The Ascendant addresses the ruler, his wellbeing and prosperity. Assuming the inquiry connects
with the State, all subtleties relating to the main pastor can be checked from the Lagna.
Assuming it is the Union or the Country that is the subject of the inquiry, the prosperity or in any
case of the state leader is evaluated from the rising sign. The second house administers the
financial approaches of the public authority.
The third house shows the protection powers and furthermore the adjoining states or nations all
things considered and relations with them. Malefics here show line squirmishes and strains
between adjoining states or adjoining nations. The fourth house administering vehicles covers
generally homegrown issues. The fifth house is vital since it provides insight into the individuals
who encompass the ruler as consultants and advisors.
The sixth house administering foes or the resistance is sufficiently straightforward. The seventh
shows fighting and matters of war and safeguard procedure. The eighth house which shows age
can likewise be taken to expect the time and span of difficult situations, uproars and viciousness

 in the state and issues in the organization. It likewise gives a suspicion of the range or life span
of the decision government. The ninth house impacts the approaches of the public authority.
Mars, Saturn and Rahu beset in the ninth are an equivalent for debasement. The managerial
hardware is covered by the tenth house. The eleventh and twelfth houses rule income and use
separately. Torments to the eleventh show either a deficiency in the State's assets or weighty
burdening programs.
Here is data of much significance on political crystal gazing. The ascendant addresses the
character of the ruler - the lord, president, and so on, the ninth demonstrates the arrangement of
the ruler or the public authority and the tenth regulatory work.
Political figures in regard of a nation can be made based on the hour of beginning of the new
year. Expectations for an ideal month can be worked out based on a graph cast for the time at
which the new Moon or Amavasya closes. The subtleties outfitted in this and the accompanying
refrains can be embraced while managing unremarkable estimates, dependent upon the advanced
political, social and financial variables.

Verse 39. Malefics are destructive in houses other than the third and eleventh. Mars and the Sun

 are good in the tenth house. Benefics by and large fortify the houses they involve. A benefic in
the sixth eliminates the resistance of the adversaries. The Moon in the twelfth or eighth doesn't
advance the house. Venus possessing the seventh isn't inclined toward.
Verse 40. Subjects participate in the great and the awful impacts of the rulers. This is the
perspective on the learned works of the sages.
NOTES
As the ruler so the subjects, says a precept. Whenever the ruler is bad, unscrupulous,
characterless and unethical, individuals will likewise mirror these attributes in their lives. The
defilement and need of character among the rulers in our own nation are just being reflected by
individuals.
Refrain 41. The great and the terrible impacts of a ruler depend on eight elements meant by the
houses 1 to 8. They are the ruler, his youngsters, depository, vehicles and adherents, the castle,
spouses, counsels and preceptors and subjects.
Verse 42. Whenever the solid Sun and the Moon involve quadrants, or when Arudha and the
ascendant, or Arudha or the ascendant, end up being Cancer or Leo, then, at that point, the lord
or the ruler will practice his power completely. In the event that these are frail, he can not
appreciate regal thriving. If, nonetheless, Raja Yogas are available in the horary outline, he will
actually want to practice his regal powers.
Verse 43. Mercury oversees the likely successor; Mars indicates president; Jupiter and Venus
administer clergymen. Assuming these planets are magnified and possess positive places and are
aspected by benefics, these will have a prosperous vocation, and the ruler will actually want to
get benefits from them. Any other way they will be a wellspring of risk to the ruler, who won't
lean toward them.
Refrain 44. At the point when Arudha Lagna is Urdhwa-mukha, its master is going to enter its
commended sign, and solid planets are in fitting houses, then, at that point, the ruler will before
long accept authoritative powers.
Refrain 45. At the point when the ascendant has various benefic vargas and benefics possess the
ascendant, then, at that point, the ruler will achieve his desire and secure an another nation or
another separated position soon,
Verse 46. When benefics possess the seventh and the tenth, an elevated place in life is gotten. In
the event that they possess the first, the second and the fifth, regard and cash will be given.
Malefics involving the eleventh or twelfth (in a Raja Prasna) don't give great outcomes. The
Moon in the ascendant isn't ideal yet in the tenth he is great.
NOTES
This verse is from Shat Panchasikha or Chappana.
Verse 47. In the event that the ascendant is aspected by Mercury, the querist will conquer his
adversaries and will acquire cash and grounds.
Refrain 48. In a previous part, "Lakshanas" implying 'gain of elephants', and so forth, have been

 given. They might be used in this setting befitting rulers.

NOTES
The part alluded to is the sixteenth.
Verse 49. Solid planets arranged in good houses and specifically a solid planet placed in the
eleventh dependably present addition of articles as per the signs of the planet.
Refrain 50. At the point when the masters of the second and the eleventh end up being watery
planets or involve watery signs and Navamsas well and the ascendant is a watery sign, the ruler
will get 'ships' as gain. Whenever Capricorn is the ascendant, and the masters of the second and
the eleventh involve sea-going signs and Navamsas in negative positions, related with or
aspected by malefics or in burning, then, at that point, the ruler will lose many boats in the deal.
Refrain 51. Assuming troopers on walk put in an inquiry, "who among us will kick the bucket
and who will have achievement", the response is to be given hence:
Verse 52. Troopers in whose Rasis Saturn, Rahu, Ketu and Gulika are set at the hour of question
and warriors whose ascendant (or Janma Rasi) rulers are in burning will likewise encounter rout.
The people who stand in the bearings of Sirshodaya or Urdhwamukha signs or such ones who
involve raised spots and puts, and the individuals who are feeling with their hands, their heads or
right hand will be successful.
Refrain 53. Fighters who are positioned in the south or south-east or the people who are
confronting these headings, or the individuals who are contacting their knee-cups or the
individuals who have their weapons raised high, will kick the bucket in the war zone.

NOTES
Whenever entire militaries walk against a ruler, it is very probable some will kick the bucket in
war, others endure yet in a shameful way while still others might turn out in brilliance. In such
conditions, each fighter might need to know his destiny.
When in doubt, we can foresee rout on account of those in whose cases, at the hour of the
inquiry, Saturn, Rahu, Ketu or Gulika join the sign involved by the Moon. A similar destiny
anticipates likewise those whose master of the ascendant at the inquiry time is combust. This is
from the horary diagram. Where it is preposterous to expect to project an outline, the verse
likewise conceives the utilization of lakshanas in passing judgment on the inquiry of a warrior.
The people who face the headings of the Sirshodaya signs, or at least, Gemini (S.E.), Leo
(South), Virgo (S.W.), Libra (West), Scorpio (West) and Aquarius (North) will be effective. Men
who involve raised spots, for example, a load of rubble, stones, steps, mud hills can likewise
make certain of an ideal result. The people who contact their head or their right hand should rest
assured about accomplishment in their particular obligations.
More hints to find rout or achievement continue in the following refrain.

 Verse 54. Whenever different indications of triumph for the officers posted in the different
bearings are found, the foes will be killed and their weapons caught.
Refrain 55. The fighter who remains in a discouraged ground or who feels with his hands the
left half of his body will be crushed. On the off chance that different indications (of rout) are
found, he will be injured, or his weapons will be seized by the adversary or he will kick the
bucket.
Verse 56. Triumph falls on the people who feel with their hands, their chest, head or right hand
or their weapons. The officer, who cuts or breaks something else at that point, will likewise score
achievement.
Refrain 57. On hearing that there is to be a conflict, a lord or his delegate might enquire whether
or not the foe would attack. Then, at that point, the response is to be given as follows:
Refrain 58. Assuming that the Moon possesses a proper sign, and the ascendant turns out to be a
moveable sign and a moveable Navamsa, then, at that point, the adversary will before long come
to battle in strength. Assuming the Moon is in a moveable sign and the ascendant is in a decent
sign and a proper Navamsa, the adversary won't attack.
Verse 59. Assuming that the ascendant is a decent sign or the Moon is in a typical sign and
Mercury, Jupiter or Venus involves the sixth, then, at that point, the foe who has attacked will be
crushed.
Refrain 60. At the point when the Moon possesses a proper sign and the ascendant turns out to
be a moveable sign and Navamsa, the adversary will attack in strength. At the point when the
Moon is in a moveable sign and the ascendant falls in a decent sign, the foe however totally
ready won't walk for battling.
Verse 61. In the event that the ascendant is a proper sign and the Moon is in a typical sign,
however the foe might have drawing close, will return without battling.
Refrain 62. At the point when the Moon is in a moveable sign and the ascendant in a typical
sign, the foe will come a large portion of the way yet resign without battling. At the point when
the Moon is in a typical sign and the ascendant in a moveable sign, the adversary will walk from
two headings; and on the off chance that the ascendant is aspected by malefics, the foe will be
crushed.
Refrain 63. If malefics involve the fifth or sixth, the foe will withdraw however he has
continued a large portion of the distance. On the off chance that malefics possess the fourth
house, the adversary will be crushed in the battle.
Refrain 64. If malefics possess the first, the second, the third, the fifth, the sixth and the twelfth,
foes will come to battle, however when the malefics are in the fourth, they won't come to battle.
Verse 65. Whenever the Sun and the Moon are in the fourth, foes won't come to battle.
Whenever Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are in the fourth, they will mount an assault right away.
Verse 66. If Aries, Taurus, Leo or Sagittarius turns out to be the ascendant or the fourth house
and assuming that any planet involves them, the adversary will return without battling.

 Refrain 67. In the event that a decent sign rises and Jupiter or Saturn possesses it, the foe won't
come to battle. In the event that the ascendant is a moveable sign and the Sun or Jupiter involves
it, then, at that point, the foe will attack.
Refrain 68. Assuming Jupiter or Venus possesses the second or third, the foe will show up out
of nowhere with his military. Concerning an inquiry bearing on a missing individual, he will
return safe.

NOTES
The blends given in verse 68, viz., Jupiter or Venus possessing the second or the third from the
ascendant, can likewise be applied to inquiries bearing on missing people. In the event that at the
hour of the question the above blend is available, the missing individual will return.
Refrains 57 to 68 give mixes to see whether a hostile ruler will walk his military against the lord
(querent) or not. These equivalent mixes might be appropriately adjusted to introduce day
fighting. The idea of the signs and planets included can likewise be effectively utilized to expect
the idea of assault - ethereal, maritime or the military moving in.
The accompanying planetary mixes might be noted as demonstrative of an intrusion: All these
blends are for the hour of question.
(a) The Moon is in a proper sign, the Ascendant is in a moveable sign and a moveable
Navamsa - the foe comes in extraordinary strength.
(b) The Moon is in a typical sign and the Ascendant is in a moveable sign - the foe mounts a
two dimensional assault walking in from two unique headings.
(c) Malefics in the first, the second, the third, the fifth, the sixth and the twelfth - the
adversary comes to battle.
(d)

Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are in the fourth - an abrupt and prompt assault.

(e)

The Ascendant is a moveable sign and the Sun or Jupiter possesses it - the foe will attack.

(f)
Jupiter or Venus possesses the second or third - the foe shows up or ambushes. The idea of
the rising sign isn't indicated.
2.
Under the accompanying conditions, the foe won't attack or regardless of whether the walk
has started, will leave it:
(a) The Moon is in a moveable sign and the Ascendant is in a proper sign and a decent
Navamsa - an intrusion by the foe need not be dreaded.
(b) The Ascendant is a proper sign and the Moon is in a typical sign - the foe will start his
walk however surrender it midway.
(c) The Moon is in a moveable sign and the Ascendant is in a typical sign - the foe will begin
walking however resign without battling.
(d)

Malefics are in the fifth or the sixth - the foe will withdraw however he has walked quite

 far.
(e)

Malefics possess the fourth, the foe won't walk by any means.

(f)

The lights are in the fourth - the foe won't come to battle.

(g) Aries, Taurus, Leo or Sagittarius is the Ascendant or the fourth house and a planet
involves it - the foe returns without battling.
(h) The Ascendant is a proper sign and Jupiter or Saturn involves it - the foe will return
without battling.
3.
When the adversary walks on against the querent, the result is chosen in the accompanying
way:
(a) The Ascendant is a decent sign or the Moon is in a typical sign and the sixth house is
involved by Mercury, Jupiter or Venus - the attacking armed force will be crushed.
(b) The Ascendant in a moveable sign is aspected by malefics and the Moon is in a typical
sign - the adversary will be crushed regardless system it utilizes.
(c)

Malefics possess the fourth house - the adversary will be crushed.

These principles, however outlined in old days as relevant to the techniques for fighting winning
then, at that point, can in any case be applied in present day times with slight variations.
Refrain 69. Count from the asterism of the rising degree to the asterism held by the Moon. From
the day of the inquiry the adversary will come in as numerous days subject to the condition that
there are signs for the foe's assault, and when there are no planets mediating between the
ascendant and the Moon.
Verse 70. The hour of appearance or return of the adversary is found out by duplicating the
period alloted to the planet showing the occasion by the quantity of the Navamsa it has acquired.
NOTES
As indicated by Varahamihira, every planet is doled out a period scale, viz., the Sun ayanam (a
half year); the Moon - two ghatikas or 48 minutes; Mars - a day; Mercury - a rithu (season or two
months); Jupiter - a masa (month); Venus a paksha (fortnight): and Saturn - a varsha (year).
Assume the planet showing the attack is Venus and he is in the second, Cancer, taking care of 7
Navamsas. The time scale for Venus is multi month. This duplicated by 7, viz., 7 months show
the plausible season of attack by the adversary.
Refrain 71. Determine first the house involved by the planet that demonstrates the positive or
negative occasions. Increase this by the period represented by the master of Lagna. This counted
from Prasna day gives the time of the fructification of the occasion.
NOTES
Assume the malefics showing intrusion possess the fourth house and the ruler of the ascendant is
the Sun, whose period is a half year. Then, at that point, increasing 4, the quantity of the beset
house by 6, we get two years, and that implies, the foe will assault in two years from the day of

 the inquiry.
Refrain 72. The item gotten by increasing the period administered by the master of the
ascendant by the finished number of Navamsas in the ascendant will be the time expected for the
achievement or rout of the adversary.

NOTES
As per some pandits the time-size of the ruler of the Navamsa Lagna ought to be increased by the
quantity of Navamsa acquired by the master of Lagna.
Refrain 73. Assuming the planet that demonstrates achievement or in any case of the occasion
involves a decent sign, then, at that point, its period ought to be increased by 3; and assuming it
possesses a typical sign, the period ought to be duplicated by two.
NOTES
In a moveable sign, the period allocated holds great.
Refrain 74. In the event that, at the hour of inquiry, the examiner or someone else is seen
remaining alongside him or one of them has his hands consolidated or has his hands fastened

 with another, then, at that point, the conflict will end in intervention; or on the other hand
assuming a planet involving its own or agreeable sign perspectives the ascendant, a harmony
settlement will be endorsed by the gatherings.
Refrain 75. At the point when Mercury involves the third, the sixth, the ninth or the twelfth and
the ascendant is aspected by benefics, it very well may be intensely anticipated that an
arrangement will be endorsed by the gatherings and there will be no conflict.
NOTES
As per another translation, Soumya implies benefic planets and not Mercury.
Refrain 76. At the point when a solid malefic involves the seventh house, and he turns out to be
the successful one in Graha Yuddha (planetary battle), then, at that point, harmony will be
finished up without war, subsequently acquiring a ton of abundance. If, nonetheless, a malefic is
in the ascendant, regardless of whether there is to be harmony, it will be transitory.
Refrain 77. If the first, the eleventh and the twelfth end up being Nara Rasis (human signs) and
benefics involve something very similar, there will be startling harmony. Malefics in like manner
signs show no harmony.
Verse 78. Benefics possessing the ninth, the first, the fourth, the seventh and the tenth aspected
by benefics, mean that harmony will be finished up. Malefics aspected by malefics involving
quadrants signify that war will go on.
Refrain 79. Assuming that malefics are in Lagna, Mercury is in the third and the Sun involves
the fourth, there will be war, the residents will endure annihilation and the foe will succeed and
the safeguarding ruler will be crushed.
Verse 80. When malefics are arranged in quadrants in the vargas of Mars and aspected by
malefics, then, at that point, there will be war.
Verse 81. If Rahu, Ketu, Gulika or Kala possess or perspective the ascendant, there will be
numerous passings in the conflict. Likewise when Mars and the Sun are emphatically associated
with the ascendant, the massacre will be weighty.
Verse 82. Subsequent to getting what is implied by Sthayi and Yayi, one needs to anticipate
triumph or rout.

Verse 83. 'Yayi' is the attacking or assaulting party addressed by houses 2 to 9. 'Sthayi' is the
protecting party meant by houses 3 to 8. The trespasser or respondent will be successful
proportionately as Yayi or Sthayi has more benefics.
Verse 84. In the nation of Kola, a sort of fighting known as 'Anga Yuddha' was common in old
times. The party who enters the field of battle initially is Yayi and the party that enters next is
'Poura'.
Refrain 85. 'Pouras' are the occupants living inside the fortification, or town or city. The
attacking cluster is known as 'Yayi'.

 Refrain 86. At the point when Cancer, Scorpio, Aquarius or Pisces turns out to be the fourth
house, the foe will be crushed. On the off chance that a quadrupedal sign turns out to be the
fourth house, adversaries will withdraw being crushed.
Verse 87. Whenever the Moon, Mars and Saturn possess the eleventh, Venus, the Sun and
Mercury are individually in the first, third and fourth and Jupiter is in the fifth, the adversary will
be steered and the lord can get back to the capital victorious.
Verse 88. When benefics possess the first, the seventh and the tenth, the ruler will be fruitful.
Mercury, Jupiter and Venus in the ninth likewise show triumph, Mars and Saturn give rout.

Verse 89. Whenever the ascendant and the tenth turning out to be Nara Rasis (human signs) are
involved by malefics the attacking adversary will be crushed. When the first and the tenth are
Nara Rasis involved by benefics the trespasser will be successful.
Refrain 90. At the point when a malefic involves the first, the tenth, the eleventh or the twelfth,
the trespasser will claim the capital. A benefic in any of these houses gives rout to the trespasser.
Verse 91. Triumph or rout is to be perused from the Sun and the Moon and the signs they
involve. This is clarified in Rana Deepika.
Refrain 92. Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces are the Sun's or diurnal signs. The
leftover are the lunar or nighttime signs.
Verse 93. Whenever the Sun and the Moon involve diurnal signs, the ruler will be crushed.
Whenever they possess nighttime signs, the trespasser will be crushed.
Refrain 94. At the point when the Sun involves a nighttime sign, the intruder will overcome the
attacked and when the Moon possesses a diurnal sign, the trespasser will be repelled.
Refrain 95. At the point when the Sun and the Moon are individually in their own, i.e., diurnal
and nighttime signs, however the battling parties be youthful and exceptional, won't want to
battle.
Verse 96. Whenever solid malefic planets possess troublesome spots, the asterisms included
should be noted. The pieces of the body connoted by the star groupings, as figured from the birth
asterism, get harmed or injured.
NOTES
The 27 groups of stars administer the various pieces of the body of the warrior hence:
Janma Nakshatra or birth asterism - face; the second - left eye; the third, fourth and fifth - head;
sixth - right eye; seventh - right ear; eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh - right hand; twelfth,
thirteenth and fourteenth- right leg; fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth chest and heart; twentieth - neck; 21st, 22nd, 23rd and 24th - left hand; and 25th, 26th and 27th left leg.
Verse 97. A ruler should start to gather materials for battle on a day administered by Dhanishta.
He should gather cash and show up in the midst of his adversaries on the day governed by

 Poorva-bhadra. He ought to announce battle when Mars and the Moon involve their own vargas
in a similar Navamsa in the ascendant. Then, at that point, he will get triumph.
Verse 98. On a Tuesday, when Mars is in the ascendant or at the hour of Vishaghatika, the ruler
taking a bolt or a few water and expecting it to be searing should shoot it toward the adversary.
Assuming the bolt is sent in Vishti Kala from that quarter (Dik) represented by that Vishti, the
adversary can be handily crushed.
Verse 99. Signs or signs, pointing when wars and different catastrophes gobble up a nation, are
obviously clarified in the Samhita by Varaha Mihira. They are noted beneath.
Verse 100. Whenever sanctuaries, posts, trims, flagstaff are impacted by fire, the foe will attack
the country inside a half year.
Refrain 101. At the point when it smokes without fire, when residue and dimness swarm the
environment, horrible encounters are coming up for the country. Asterisms undetectable in a
cloudless sky around evening time and noticeable in wide sunlight demonstrate that a few risk is
nearby.
Verse 102. However there is no wind, parts of trees tear away from them; trees tumble off
evacuated; unfortunate sounds are heard from the highest points of trees. These demonstrate
inevitable conflict, affidavit of lords and pestilences all over.
NOTES
These are to be investigated, when there is dread of attack, or when the fate of a ruler is being
considered in a Prasna.
Refrain 103. Trees and creepers blossom in specific periods. At the point when they bloom in
different periods, fall of realms or annihilation in the nation can be anticipated. Assuming they
blossom rashly passing of youngsters and on the off chance that any liquid slimes out of trees,
annihilation to all things can be anticipated.
Verse 104. On the off chance that any liquid looking like alcohol issues out of trees, vehicles
will be obliterated. On the off chance that any watery substance looking like blood issues out,
there will be war; assuming any fluid looking like honey comes out, there will be pestilences;
assuming anything like oil issues out there will be destitution and in the event that anything as
slight as water issues out, there will be incredible dread influencing individuals.
Verse 105. On the off chance that the tree of love (by and large saved in a castle) blooms in
inopportune periods and yields natural products in the surprising seasons, it foreshadows the
ruler's passing. In a similar way, assuming smoke or fire issues out of that tree, it foreshadows
the passing of the ruler.
Verse 106. Dead trees set forth new leaves, trees kick the bucket with next to no genuine reason,
fallen trees ascend willingly and set forth leaves; these demonstrate some heavenly risk is
nearby.
Refrain 107. At the point when trees appear to shudder and sounds exude from them, it means
that a few disasters influencing individuals overall are close by. At the point when all such
strange peculiarities occur, results draw near ten months.

 Refrain 108. Weapons appear to consume, or to make uncommon sounds or to shudder and
shake; they emerge from the sheath voluntarily, cuts and breaks happen. Every one of these show
that an unfortunate conflict is looming.
Verse 109. Birds that for the most part possess towns and towns start to move to backwoods, and
woods birds incessant inhabitable spots on a huge scale; creatures that are seen during daytime
are seen during night and, nighttime ones continuous wide sunlight. These additionally
demonstrate risk.
Refrain 110. At the point when a castle, or consecrated trees kept close to the group of
concubines or entryway of a fortress, are being tormented by birds coming en masse, or by
honey-hives or by normal and wild development of mallika and lotus creepers or by the incessant
appearance of snakes, there will be ruin in the country.
Verse 111. Whenever any house turns into the vault of bones and stays of the dead body got by
canines, the proprietor of the house will kick the bucket.
Verse 112. On the off chance that fire and smoke are seen in a backwoods where there is no fire,
both toward the beginning of the day and evening, long and profound breaks are found in the
lower layers of the ground, or then again in the event that the entire ground appears to shudder
and shake, some risk is within reach.
Refrain 113. While kids conveying weapons, sticks and stones meander about crying, "cut, beat,
steal away, partition", some surprising risk is close by.
Refrain 114. The house stamped or distorted by ash or some hued mud will go to ruins; when
the image of the proprietor is drawn or the figure of pretas engraved in any respectable family
house, it will before long be obliterated.

Refrain 115. The house not kept clean by incessant clearing however permitted to be covered by
spider webs; the house where the hallowed lights are not lit; and the house where low class ladies
fight, will go to canines.
Refrain 116. The realm of a ruler who endures agnostics and counter-religionists, and who
ignores great utilizations and customs and who is dependably envious, furious and fretful and
who is intrigued uniquely in battling, will go to rack and destroy.
Verse 117. Signs or signs ought to be curious and strange. They ought not shape part of the
traditions of the spot, or of the times or of the local area.

NOTES
The different signs recorded in these refrains ought to connect with strange peculiarities and not
to existing circumstances.
Refrain 118. At the point when a military walks to the war zone, the presence of tissue eating
birds in the back shows the loss of the military in the front line. Trip of birds (a flock of them)

 toward the front of the military is favorable.
Verse 119. The great and awful outcomes ought to be anticipated by the celestial prophet after a
cautious investigation of the different shades of contrasts in the signs.
Verse 120. As it is truly challenging to assess the strength of planets and signs, signs help a lot
of the clarification of their genuine strength.
Refrain 121. At the point when the previously mentioned horrible signs are seen, the endorsed
therapeutic measures ought to be performed and the undermined detestable impacts won't occur.
Verse 122. To get triumph, the ruler should begin battle on a propitious day, tithi, rasi and
nakshatra.
NOTES
The day and time should be fixed based on rules given in chips away at Muhurtha. The
promising time is said to avoid the disasters showed by the signs and planetary positions.
Refrain 123. The master of the Varna of the ruler ought to be solid when correcting starts. The
master of his introduction to the world ascendant ought to likewise be extremely impressive. The
rising sign should be urdhwamukha and sirshodaya and moveable. The banished asterisms ought
to be stayed away from.
NOTES
To begin the battling on favorable time ought to be fixed with the accompanying attitudes:
(a)

The planet controlling the rank of the ruler ought to be solid;

(b)

The master of the birth ascendant of the ruler ought to be solid;

(c) The Muhurtha Lagna, i.e., ascendant to begin the conflict, ought to be urdhwamukha,
sirshodaya and a moveable sign.
The sirshodaya signs are: Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and Aquarius.
Bharani, Krittika, Aridra, Aslesha, Makha, Pubba, Visakha, Jyeshta, Moola, Poorvashadha,
Poorvabhadra are the precluded stars. The fourth (chaturthi), the sixth (shashthi), the eighth
(ashtami), the ninth (navami), the twelfth (dwadasi) and the fourteenth (chaturdasi) ought to be
stayed away from as likewise Sunday, Tuesday and Saturday and Aries, Leo, Scorpio, Capricorn
and Aquarius.
Refrain 124. At the point when the sign wherein the sign seems is helpful, when planets on the
way are well arranged, the lord should walk the military, staying away from precluded asterisms,
the group of stars of Chitta and the chidra lunar days.
NOTES
The chidra tithi or restricted lunar days are the fourth (chaturthi), the sixth (shashthi), the eighth
(ashtami), the ninth (navami) and the fourteenth (chaturdasi).
Refrain 125. Prishtodaya signs are not great for ventures. So additionally fixed signs. Gemini is
foreboding and causes the defeat of the ruler.

 Refrain 126. Urdhwamukha signs when involved by benefics are great for venture. So
additionally fixed signs. Be that as it may, Aquarius is conventional and hurts. Gemini regardless
of whether conjoined by benefic planets ought to be kept away from. This is the perspective on
sage Garga.
Verse 127. Venture began in a sirshodaya sign prompts the accomplishment of the article in
view. A prishtodaya sign losses one's article. Armed forces should withdraw after rout. Simple
fulfillment of the point can be had by beginning towards the different headings administered by
the different signs. The counter-Diks get just loss.
NOTES
Aries and its thirds demonstrate East: Taurus and its thirds show West; Gemini and its thirds rule
South and Cancer and its thirds mean North.
Refrain 128. Venture during day ought to be led in diurnal signs, and during night in nighttime
signs; assuming the other way around the outcome will be horrible. Assuming the excursion is
started when the Sun and the Moon are in tie ascendant which ought to be a moveable sigp, the
item will be understood.
NOTES
On the off chance that the Sun, the Moon and the ascendant are together in a decent sign, return
to possess spot should be possible. Normal signs are appropriate for beginning the excursion and
furthermore for returning.
Verse 129. The second, third, sixth and tenth signs from the birth-ascendant and extremist Moon
of the local are favorable for the excursion.
NOTES
As per some the ascendant at the hour of the excursion could likewise be the indication of the
local's ascendant upon entering the world or his extreme Moon-sign.
Refrain 130. At the point when the ruler begins when the eighth house from the rising sign or
the Janma Rasi of the adversary is involved by a malefic planet, the foe will be annihilated.
Verse 131. Whenever the Moon possesses the fourth (from the ascendant at the hour of the
excursion), or when the ruler of the sixth involves the ascendant, the local will encounter pain.
At the point when the master of the Dik (bearing) towards which the ruler begins turns out to be
powerless and is placed in the sixth, the eighth or the twelfth, then, at that point, misery, bad
reputation and demise will happen.
Verse 132. The accompanying ought to be stayed away from: (a) The sixth and eighth signs
from the birth ascendant or revolutionary Moon of the individual; (b) the signs involved by the
masters of the sixth and the eighth from the birth ascendant and the birth Moon; (c) when the
rulers of the birth ascendant and the birth Moon become frail (in the political race diagram), or
these signs are tormented by malefics; and (d) the ruler of Dik (heading), the ascendant and the
benefics at the time are feeble: When the excursion is attempted in the previously mentioned
periods misfortunes alone will occur.

 Verse 133. Whenever the Moon involves the fourth from the ascendant (at the hour of the
conflict), there will be a few beginning victories however the end will be deadly. At the point
when the master of the course towards which the ruler ventures, involves the sixth or the eighth
from the ascendant (in the political race graph), the outcome will be shocking.
Refrain 134. The sixth, the eighth and the twelfth houses from the Janma Lagna of an individual
ought to be kept away from for everything. Shaving, marriage and excursions can be led in the
sixth from the Janma Rasi.
NOTES
The ascendant at the hour of undertaking any movement ought not fall in the sixth, the eighth or
the twelfth from one's Janma Lagna or Janma Rasi. Be that as it may, with respect to travel,
marriage, shaving, the Muhurta ascendant can fall in the sixth from one's Janma Rasi.
Verse 135. There is a nonexistent log or stick known as Parigha. Its lay is as per the following:
Krittika to Aslesha - east and south-east, Makha to Visakba - south and south-west, Anuradha to
Sravana (counting Abhijit) west and north-west and Dhanishta to Revati - north and north-east.
Verse 136. The lay of the Parigha for 14 days from Dhanishta to Aslesha is north-east (vayavya).
Thus on those days it is foreboding to travel south or west. The lay of the Parigha for 14 days
from Makha to Sravana is south-west (nairiti). Henceforth, on those days it is unfavorable to go
north to east. Ladies and cows are excepted.
Refrain 137. The heavenly bodies Jyeshta, Poorva-bhadra, Rohini, Uttara, Pushyami, Hasta,
Sravana and Aswini separately signify diksoola in the east, south-east, south, south-west, west,
north-west, north and north-east. Go in the different bearings ought not be embraced in the group
of stars indicating the diksoola.
NOTES
For example Jyeshta shows sula towards the east. No excursion ought to be embraced towards
the east on a day controlled by Jyeshta. Likewise with respect to different asterisms, travel
towards bearings in star groupings proclaimed as showing sula ought to be kept away from.
Verse 138. As indicated by Brihaspati, asterisms Rohini, Mrigasira, Pushyami, Hasta, Anuradha,
Sravana, Dhanishta, Revati are promising for all quarters. Varaha Mihira considers Aswini,
Pushyami, Hasta and Anuradha to be really great for all places.
Verse 139. Travel ought to be stayed away from towards headings on days administered by
asterisms pronounced to be Parigha in this manner: Uttarashadha and Sravana - east; Aswini and
Uttarabhadra - south; Rohini and Pushyami - west and Uttara and Hasta - north.
Refrain 140. The 25th and 27th asterisms from one's introduction to the world star ought to be
kept away from for ventures. From certain perspectives, these stars are unpropitious for generally
great activities.
Refrain 141. The heavenly body Moola is really great for all ventures. Chitta is ominous for all
ventures. From certain perspectives, the first lunar day is promising while others say it isn't
positive for ventures.

 Refrain 142. The gatherings of lunar days - Nanda, Bhadra, Jaya and Purna - are promising for
movement towards east, south, west and north separately. Adhomukha signs are not great.
NOTES
Nanda tithis are the first (pratipada), the sixth (shashti) and eleventh (ekadasi); the Bhadra tithis
are the second (dwiteeya), the seventh (saptamf) and the twelfth (dwadasf); Jaya tithis are the
third

(triteeya); eighth (ashtami) and thirteenth (trayodasi); and poorna tithis are the fifth (panchami),
tenth (dasami) and fifteenth (Paornima). At the hour of an excursion the ascendant ought not fall
in an adhomnkha sign.
Verse 143. To travel east on a Tuesday is great; towards south - Monday and Saturday; towards
west - Wednesday and Thursday; and towards north - Sunday and Friday. No excursion ought to
be embraced towards the east on a Sunday; south - Thursday; west - Friday; and north - Monday.
Verse 144. As indicated by Brihaspati the next week-days are ominous for going towards
various bearings: Thursday and Friday - east; Tuesday - south; Saturday and Monday - west; and
Thursday and Wednesday - north.
Verse 145. Coming up next are promising for movement: east - Tuesday; south - Monday and
Saturday; west - Wednesday and Thursday; and north - Wednesday and Friday.
Verse 146. Beginning a Sunday gets cataclysms in the manner; Monday - need of excitement
and some hindrance for dinners; Tuesday - dread from consumes and pitta (bilious difficulties);
Wednesday - compromise with companions; Thursday - achievement and benefits; Friday - gain
of garments, riches and ladies; Saturday - sicknesses and detainments and even passing.
Refrain 147. The impacts of excursions attempted during the Kala-hora of various planets are
like the impacts of week days referenced above with this distinction, viz., venture in the Moon's
Kala-hora brings help from ladies and gain of gems.
Refrains 148 and 149. It is favorable to embrace an excursion to that quarter, the master of
which, is in a quadrant or involves the right quarter determined in the request for Nakshatras. It
is likewise promising when the ruler of the work day involves the Upachaya Rasi or the right
quarter in the request for Nakshatras.
It is propitious, despite the fact that dismissed on different grounds, to start an excursion when
the master of the work day possesses 3, 6, 10 and 11 from Yatra Lagna. However acknowledged
on different grounds, it isn't favorable to begin when the ruler of the work day involves other
than an upachaya place.
Verse 150. If, at the hour of beginning, the Moon gets together with malefics, ailment will be the
outcome. Assuming he is related with benefics, the local will fight with the individual with
whom he voyages. Henceforth the Moon ought not be conjoined by any planet fortunate or
unfortunate.
Refrain 151. At the point when you attempt an excursion keeping the dik or course

 communicated by the asterism where Venus stands to one side, you won't return and you will
meet with death. This Sukra Dosha is ineffectual when you leave the nation brought about by
starvations, floods and so forth, or when your excursion restricts itself to adjoining parts or when
Venus is lifted up or involves own home.

Refrain 152. No excursion ought to be attempted towards a Dik where Gulika, Saturn or vishti
stands. The contrary side acquires achievement.
Refrain 153. An excursion by water ought to be attempted in mridu, kshipra and chara heavenly
bodies. The ascendant should be a watery sign; and Capricorn sign or Navamsa ought to be
prohibited.

NOTES
Aswini, Pushyami, Hasta are kshjpra groups of stars; Punarvasu, Swati, Sravana, Dhanishta,
Satabhisha are chara heavenly bodies; and Mrigasira, Chitta, Anuradha and Revati are mridu star
groupings.
Verse 154. In fixing the ideal opportunity for an excursion (Yatra Lagna) the accompanying
manners ought to be kept away from: (I) The Moon in the splendid half in the first, 6tb, eighth;
(ii) the Moon in obscurity half in the seventh or tenth; (iii) Venus in the sixth, seventh or tenth;
(iv) Jupiter in the third, eighth or tenth houses; (v) malefics in all houses other than third, sixth,
tenth and eleventh; Rahu and Saturn in the tenth; and (vi) all planets in the twelfth.
Verse 155, 156 and 157. The Sun in the first bouse at the hour of beginning (yatra Lagna) gets
sadness, hotness, sicknesses and deterrents; in the second, obliteration of wellbeing, abundance,
notoriety and the military; in the third, gain of cash, food, pearls and terrains; in the fourth, fight
with relations and abhorrence for everything, uneasiness in rest and voyages; in the fifth, risk to
youngsters and gain of abundance from the wayside; in the sixth annihilation of adversaries and
achievement of wanted item; in the seventh deficiency of cash and squabbles with spouse; in the
eighth, demise, or destructive risk; in the ninth, good cause diminishes and cash is acquired; in
the tenth, accomplishment without one's effort or individual information; in the eleventh, gain of
gems; in the twelfth, deficiency of cash in all ways.
Refrain 158. The Moon in the first, fights and despondency; in the second, gain of garments,
ladies and gems, favor from children and relations; in the third, gain of ladies, gems and riches;
in the fourth, gain of cash (assuming the Moon is splendid) and passing of relations (if dull).
NOTES
At the point when the full Moon involves Lagna, harmony and appeasement. of all pains crop in.
Verses 159 and 160. The Moon in the fifth demonstrates gain of cash and loss of kids; in the
sixth, fights with relations and despondency; seventh addition of abundance, grounds and ladies:
on the off chance that he is powerless, deficiency of cash; eighth, passing or sorrow; ninth, the
individual won't return right away, his main goal will meet with progress; when Moon is in the
tenth, deficiency of cash; solid Moon in the first, increment of riches; in the eleventh increase of

 cash, bliss and flourishing; and in the twelfth, dread, loss of abundance, distress and infections.
Verses 161, 162 and 163. Mars in the first indi-cases dread from discharge and toxin,
inconvenience from weapons and sicknesses because of blood defilement; in the second, risk to
the military however the accomplishment of all objects; in the third, gain of ladies, gems,
abundance and garments; in the fourth, dread from foes and demise of family members; in the
fifth, risk to youngsters; in the sixth, annihilation of adversaries surprisingly; in the seventh,
deficiency of cash, distress from adversaries and infections; in the eighth, risk to family
members, deficiency of cash, sadness from illnesses and anxiety toward death; in the ninth
obstacle to noble cause; tenth, great from certain perspectives and terrible as indicated by other;
in the eleventh, gain of cash and flourishing; and in the twelfth, extraordinary deficiency of cash.
Verses 164 and 165. Mercury in the ascendant shows notoriety, happines, achievement and
achievement of point; in the second, gain of cash here and there cautiously and in some cases
indiscreetly; in the third, achievement of one's ideal items; fourth, solace in rest, in food and
success; in the fifth, bliss from children; in the sixth, demise of adversaries and mishaps to
oneself; in the seventh, organization of good ladies and acquistion of garments and cash; in the
eighth, joy from certain perspectives and hopelessness as indicated by some others; in the ninth,
increment of beneficent deeds; in the tenth, accomplishment, everything being equal: in the
eleventh, increment of instruction and abundance without effort; and magnanimous deeds; in the
twelfth, much consumption.
Verses 166, 167 and 168. Jupiter in the first shows acclaim; in the second, gain of cash; in the
third, exhaustion because of movements; in the fourth, regard gathering from altruistic activities;
in the fifth, achievement of inconceivable points; in the sixth, control of foes or as indicated by
some being prevailed upon by the foe; in the seventh, notoriety, riches and ladies; in the eighth,
demise or from certain perspectives, the individual will live lengthy; in the ninth, birth of a child
and increment of magnanimous deeds; in the tenth, gain of cash and accomplishment in all
activities; in the eleventh, fulfillment of wanted items: and in the twelfth, a wide range of
anguish.
NOTES
There seems, by all accounts, to be a few inconsistencies in the portrayal of the aftereffects of
planets involving better places from Yatra Lagna. For instance, in verse 154, Jupiter's
circumstance in the tenth isn't inclined toward where as per refrain 168, Jupiter in the tenth
demonstrates gain of cash and so forth The creator doesn't not seem to have demonstrated how
such inconsistencies could be settled. Under such conditions a celestial prophet ought to go by
his own force of investigation and translation.
Verses 169 and 170. Venus in the first shows favor of moving young ladies, achievement in all
activities, gain of garments and festoons and agreeable food; in the second, gain of cash; in the
third, never gets worn out; in the fourth, closer relationship with relations; in the fifth, gain of
abundance, station throughout everyday life and acclaim; in the sixth, inconvenience from
adversaries, anguish, need of solace in rest or ventures or extended stay in a spot; some are of the
assessment that Venus in the sixth gets joy and rout of the foe; in the seventh, gain of ladies and
abundance initially and in the end loss of everything; in the eighth, achievement in one's points;
in the ninth, achievement of one's articles immediately; in 4he tenth, gain of much riches; in the

 eleventh, achievement and financial increases; and in the twelfth, misery and need of rest from
certain perspectives; some are of the assessment that it is great.

Verse 171, 172 and 173. Saturn in the first in the movement ascendant implies detainment and
demise; in the second, deficiency of cash; in the third obliteration of the adversary; in the fourth,
others will achieve the annihilation of the family members; in the fifth, disappointment in all
things; in the sixth, foes will be vanquished; in the seventh, illnesses in the eyes and need of
energy; in the eighth, passing from toxic substance, shoot and weapons; in the ninth, no
satisfaction or sensations of good cause; in the tenth, break in one's calling and pain; in the
eleventh, gain of cash and accomplishment over the foe; and in the twelfth, a wide range of
catastrophes.
Refrain 174. Malefic planets in the third, sixth, tenth and eleventh give helpful outcomes. Yet,
Saturn in the tenth is terrible. Benefics in all houses are useful of good however Venus in the
seventh doesn't give ideal outcomes.
Verse 175. A planet horrible by position and so on, at the hour of birth, however a benefic,
doesn't do great when he possesses Yatra Lagna. A planet great by position and solid however a
malefic, doesn't cause damage when he possesses Yatra Lagna.
NOTES
This is an interesting refrain which can likewise be applied to the Gochara or travel
consequences of planets. A characteristic benefic may possess horrible positions and so on, in the
birth diagram. Such a planet put in the ascendant at the hour of beginning an excursion (Yatra
Lagna) doesn't give any gainful outcomes. In like manner a malefic planet which possesses a
great situation in the birth outline can cause no damage in the event that he is set in the
ascendant.
Verse 176. A planet powerless as per horoscope and ominous in Gochara development and
hostile to the predominant Dasa ruler, however a benefic doesn't be beneficial to the local
assuming he involves Yatra Lagna.
Refrain 177. A planet solid at the hour of birth and great right now and well disposed to the
master of the Dasa winning at that point, however a malefic, gives just good outcomes to the
local, assuming he possesses Yatra Lagna.
Verse 178. On the off chance that the ruler of the sign involved by the Moon at the hour of birth
of the foe is in burning or incapacitated or in Yatra Lagna or sixth house from something similar,
venture embraced will end in great.

NOTES
Here the thought is that assuming the master of the Janma Rasi in the birth graph of the foe is
combust or in weakness in the Yatra diagram, or involves the ascendant or the sixth in the Yatra
outline of the individual who wishes to proclaim war, then, at that point, the individual
concerned will be effective. All the over 4 refrains can be applied in individual situations while

 managing one's foe or the rival. Assume X (offended party) needs to document a suit against say
Y (litigant), then, at that point, X should choose a propitious time so that in the political race
diagram the ruler of the Janma Rasi of the respondent is weakened or involves the Lagna or the
sixth at the hour of recording the suit by the offended party. This should guarantee achievement
in the court issue. Comparably this guideline can be utilized while recording political race
applications. In real practice we have found that refrain 178 can be applied effectively.
Refrain 179. Certain yogas framed by the planets at the hour of an excursion as clarified in
Madhaveeya and different works can be applied to all-rulers and the average folks.
Verse 180. However 'Yogas' influence all indistinguishable, it is more compelling on account of
rulers.
This is the perspective on Acharya Madhava.
Verse 181. Rulers ought to painstakingly look at the yogas while fixing promising times for
ventures, while Brahmins, Vaisyas andSudras ought to inspect the lunar day and asterism.
Criminals ought to think about the signs. All others ought to painstakingly fix a Muhurtha when
they attempt any excursion.

NOTES
The creator is clear in recommending that the rulers ought to painstakingly consider the yogas
i.e., the different unique mixes given in the above refrains. It infers that undoubtedly thought of
the lunar day (tithi) and group of stars (nakshatra) is sufficient. Obviously hoodlums and looters
are askad to observe "signs". The reference to hoodlums by the creator seems to suggest that in
his days there could have been 'fair' criminals who had faith in "burglarizing Paul and paying
Peter." Our granddad used to say that he was himself mindful, in his more youthful days, of the
presence of specific cheats, who were men of character and standards in all regards however had
confidence in stealing so what they took could be dispersed to poor people and the destitute.
Verse 182. The specific heading which the vehicles conveying the weapons of war and so forth,
should accept when the military starts its walk to get triumph over the adversary ought to be
painstakingly noted. This has been clarified in Madhaveeya.
Refrain 183. A lord while beginning the excursions should put his right foot immovably on the
ground. In the wake of strolling 32 feet of ground, he ought to get into his vehicle. He should
mount on an elephant's back, utilize his chariot, ride on horse-back or utilize carts
proportionately as the course is towards the east, south, west or north individually.
Verse 184. Whenever he once begins he can stop solely after voyaging 1000 dhanus or 500
dhanus or in the event of unavoidable need he can end subsequent to going 100 dhanus.
Refrain 185. After his beginning the excursion, a lord ought not stop in a spot for over 10 days
persistently. Customary individuals can't stop for over five days. In the event that they surpass as
far as possible, they ought to again fix another Muhurtha for beginning.

 Signs
Refrain 186. Sniffling at the beginning of any endeavor isn't great. Assuming that a cow does
this at that point, passing will occur. Assuming this is finished by matured people, little
youngsters and debilitated men, the malevolent impact need not be thought of.
Refrain 187. Sniffling is viewed as great while taking medication, while getting into a vehicle,
while sitting, while resting for rest, while taking food while initiating schooling, and while
planting seeds.
Refrain 188. While consuming ashes, elephant, horse,bhadra deepa, moving young ladies, kusa
gross, new mud, rice, sugarcane, chamara, eatables and weapons end up being signs at the hour
of an excursion, they acquire great.
Verse 189. Bheri, mridanga, mritu madhala, sanka, veena, the sound of vedic serenades,
engaging and pleasant music, a young lady with her child, a cow with its calf, a washerman with
his washed garments, are likewise propitious signs.
Verse 190. One ought not continue on his excursion assuming that he ends up hearing others
quarreling or crying.
Refrain 191. Assume an inquiry is posed, "What will be my destiny in the present battling;
demise, triumph or injury?", the response should be given in this manner:
Refrain 192. People brought into the world in the groups of stars which end up being the second,
27th or eleventh to nineteenth from that held by the Sun (at the hour of excursion) will meet with
death. Those brought into the world in the third, fourth, twentieth and 21st will get a kind of
progress. Also those brought into the world in the excess ones will get total triumph.
NOTES
This game plan is known as the Surya Chakra. Assume the Sun is in the asterism of Aslesha at
the hour of beginning the excursion, the second, the 27th, the eleventh, the twelfth, the thirteenth,
the fourteenth, the fifteenth, the sixteenth, the seventeenth, the eighteenth and the nineteenth end
up being Makha, Pushyami, Moola, Poorvashada, Uttarashada, Revati, Aswini, Bharani, Krittika,
Rohini and Mrigasira. Assuming that the individual who considers to begin the excursion is
brought into the world in any of these stars, the outcome is passing.

The third, fourth, twentieth and 21st from the heavenly body involved by the Sun are Pubba,
Uttara, Aswini and Bharani. Assuming the individual concerned is brought into the world in any
of these stars, the outcome is some kind of a triumph.
The leftover stars are the fifth, sixth, the seventh, the eighth, the ninth, the tenth, the 22nd, the
23rd the 24th, the 25th and the 28th are Hasta, Chitta, Swati, Visakha, Anuradha, Rohini,
Mrigasira, Aridra and Punarvasu. Assuming the individual is brought into the world in any of
these, he will get total achievement.

Verse 193. People brought into the world in the asterisms which end up being the second and

 27th from that held by the Sun will encounter an impression of dread. Triumph will be gotten,
when the birth groups of stars end up being the third to tenth. Passing will happen when the birth
asterisms are involved by the Sun and the fourteenth and fifteenth from it. Affliction will result
when the birth star is the 26th, second, thirteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth. This is called Surya
Kalagni Chakra.
NOTES
Assume the star held by the Sun is Rohini. The second and 27th from this will be Mrigasira and
Krittika individually. Those brought into the world in these two stars will encounter dread.
The third to tenth stars from Rohini are Aridra, Poonarvasu, Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha, Pubba,
Uttara, Hasta. Birth in these stars mean triumph.
Asterism involved by the Sun and the fourteenth and fifteenth from it are Hasta, Uttarabhadra
and Revati. Those brought into the world in these will meet with death.
The 27th, second, thirteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth from the star held by the Sun are Krittika
Mrigasira, Visakha, Anuradha and Jyeshta. Birth in these show disorder.
Verse 194. Those brought into the world in the asterism involved by the Sun, the second, the
ninth, tenth, eleventh, eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth from it will kick the bucket; people
brought into the world in the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth
from that involved by the Sun will be crushed; people brought into the world in the third, fourth,
fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, 21st to 26th, from that involved by the Sun will score triumph. This
is Surya Soola Chakra.
Verse 195. Assume the inquiry is posed: "From which side would it be a good idea for me I
battle to get a triumph or rout ?" Then the response should be given via cautiously examining
"Bhumi Virya" as given beneath.
Verse 196. The 12 lunar months starting from Chaitra have 24 pakshas or half-lunar months.
Three pakshas are to be apportioned to the eight bearings starting from the east. Consequently in
the two pakshas of Chaitra and one of Vaisakha, the east is solid. Subsequently is to be
discovered the bhumibala or the imperativeness of the earth. In the event that the battling began
keeping the solid dik either to the back or to one side, triumph can be scored.
NOTES
The twelve lunar months are Chaitra, Vaisakha, Jyeshta, Ashadha, Sravana, Bhadrapada,
Asweeja, Kartika, Margasira, Pushya, Magha and Phalguna. The diks or headings are to be
alloted along these lines:
East is solid - Chaitra 2 pakshas and in Vaisakha 1 paksha. South-east is solid - Vaisakha 1
paksha and in Jyeshta 2 pakshas.
Subsequently, in the event that fightings start in Jyeshta Masa, the military ought to be so
positioned as to have S.E in its back or to its on the right track to guarantee triumph.
Refrain 197. We have given something with respect to Yuddha Prasna. More subtleties can be
had from different works and the aftereffects of war anticipated.

 Mrigaya Prasna
Refrain 198. Assuming the eighth house turns out to be claimed by Mars or involved by him, or
then again on the off chance that Mars is placed in a kendra, a pig with its young ones will be
shot dead. In the event that the Sun involves a kendra, a tiger will be shot dead. Assuming that
Venus possesses the first, eighth or eleventh and Mercury is in a quadrant, no creature can be
shot dead. On the off chance that Venus possesses the first, eighth or eleventh and Mars is in a
quadrant, a pig will be shot however it will get away.
Refrain 199. Assuming that the ascendant is a moveable sign involved by Mars, Gulika is placed
in the eighth and Saturn remains in the fourth, a pig will be caught in the chase.
Refrain 200. The Sun, Saturn, Mars and Rahu involving the fourth, seventh, the ascendant and
the tenth shows the demise of numerous creatures in the chase.
Refrain 201. When malefics involve moveable signs and benefics are in fixed signs and Gulika
is in the third, numerous creatures like tigers, and so on, will be killed.
Verse 202. In the event that malefics involve kendras or quadrants, the fifth or the ninth, Mandi
is set in the third, and Capricorn ends up rising, creatures will be caught in the chase. At the point
when the Moon and Mars are in the eighth, Gulika is in the third, and Yamakantaka possesses
the ninth a pregnant creature will be killed. The nature and sort of the creatures are to be learned
from the rising decanate.
Verse 203. That which helps the simple killing or catch of creatures in a chase is the height or
misery of the ground. This can be known from the Rasi or planet. The quantity of creatures to be
caught ought to be discovered from the quantity of planets in ignition, in weakness, or in
unfriendly places.
Verse 204. In Sara Samgraha, creatures have been characterized under different heads as bipeds,
quadrupeds, and so forth, and planets additionally have been assigned connections to creatures.
They are given beneath: -

Refrain 205. The Sun administers lion and other prevalent creatures; the Moon, bunny and other
delicate creatures; Mars, tiger, panther and such brutal creatures; Mercury, pig and hoard;
Jupiter, elephant and pony; Venus, deer and stag; Saturn, jackass and camel and Rahu, crawling
creatures as godha. The Sun and Saturn administer bipeds, the Moon and Mercury, six-legged
creatures, Mars and Jupiter quadrupeds and Venus and Rahu, 8 legged creatures.
Refrain 206. As per a few creators, the Sun oversees lion; the Moon, bunny; Mars, tiger;
Mercury, pig; Jupiter, wild elephant; Venus, little creatures; Saturn, creatures that live on thistles,
and so on, as camel; and Rahu, crawling and creeping ones like snakes.
Refrain 207. Aries, Taurus, Leo, Sagittarius administer quadrupeds. We will currently depict the
creatures as given in Krishneeya.
Verses 208 to 211. The Sun in Sagittarius shows elephant; in Leo, lion; in Taurus, deer and stag;

 when the Moon is in Sagittarius, it is horse; in Leo, lion; in Aries, goats; in Taurus, bulls and
cows. Whenever Mars possesses Sagittarius, it is horse; Leo, tiger; Aries, goats; and Taurus,
bulls. Whenever Mercury is in Sagittarius, Leo, Aries or Taurus, it implies hoard and monkey.
Jupiter in Sagittarius implies horse; in Leo, camel; in Aries and Taurus, camel and jackass. At the
point when Venus possesses Sagittarius it is horse; Leo and Aries, elephant and jackass; and
Taurus, wild bull. Whenever Saturn possesses Sagittarius, it implies elephant; in Leo, mandrill
(monkey); in Aries, he-bison; in Taurus, she-bison.
Verse 212. Planets that possess quadrants and thirds show creatures that should have been
visible while hunting, while that planet which is gotten together with Gulika demonstrates the
creature to have been shot dead.

Precipitation

Verse 1. At the hour of the sun based entrance into Gemini, when the Moon possesses a watery
Navarasa and Venus is in the second or twelfth from the Sun, there will be bountiful downpours.
At the point when the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Saturn and Rahu are in watery signs and Mercury
and Venus conjoin in a decent sign, there will be exceptionally weighty downpours.
Verse 2. Whenever the Sun, Mercury and Venus possess a similar sign and a similar Navamsa,
there will be weighty downpours. In any case, assuming the sign and Navamsa end up being
watery, the downpours will be even more weighty.
Verse 3. Whenever Mercury and Venus involve a similar sign and a similar Navamsa and in
ignition, and Venus turns out to be behind Mars, then, at that point, additionally there will be
abundant downpours.
Verse 4. Assuming the Sun is in a hearty sign and the Moon, Mercury and Venus involve watery
vargas, and around then if a. rainbow is found in the western sky, then, at that point, additionally
there will be ample downpours.
NOTES
On the off chance that a planet possesses a watery sign in the Navamsa, Drekkana, and so on, it
implies it is in watery vargas.
Refrain 5. At the point when the Moon involves watery vargas and Mars and Saturn are in
hearty vargas and a rainbow is seen in the east, there will be weighty precipitation.
Verse 6. In the blustery season the rainbow showing up in the east doesn't give downpour. In
different seasons, a rainbow in the east will get downpours. A rainbow in the west during the
stormy season acquires a deluge.
Verse 7. Whenever the Sun is completely covered by mists, a brilliance brought about by the
blends of the Sun's beams is apparent and this can be seen through the mists simply looking like
the Sun himself. This is known as prathi surya or counterfeit sun.
Refrain 8. At the point when the false sun shows up towards the north of the Sun's circle, there

 will be downpour; towards the south, a whirlwind; and on the two sides, a flood will come in.
Assuming it shows up towards the highest point of the Sun's circle, some risk to the lord is seen;
and beneath the plate implies a few cataclysms to individuals.
Verses 9, 10 and 11. Whenever it downpours on another Moon day and the pratipada day, there
will be no downpours in obscurity half. In both pakshas when it downpours during the initial 15
ghatikas on Dwiteeya and the keep going 15 ghatikas on Pratipada, there will be bountiful
downpours during those pakshas. Whenever it rains just a little on those days, rains likewise will
be scant during those pakshas. In the event that it doesn't rain then, at that point, there will be no
downpour during that paksha.
NOTES
The study of climate determining had been deliberately examined by our old space experts and
stargazers, however western researchers might say that meteorology is another science. An
efficient investigation of the science was made by our old cosmologists and crystal gazers.
Indeed, even today it involves normal event that town stargazers are squarely in a shockingly
high level of their climate forecasts. Their standards are basic and apportion away with
exorbitant device. Perception combined with experience empowered the extraordinary sages of
India to plunge profound into the subject of meteorology and find the regulations administering
climate, precipitation, storms, and so on, which are of most extreme significance to humanity.
Meteorolegy was taken by the Hindus as a part of soothsaying on the grounds that the
magnificent bodies, the perspectives, conjunctions, and so on, are generally normal to both.
Each individual from the nearby planet group which, obviously, incorporates the earth, can apply
a significant impact by attractive energy upon each other. This prompts the recommendation that
planetary impacts might actually be delivered upon the extremely portable environment of the
earth. The antiquated hypothesis that the Moon practices administrative command over climate
varieties has now turned into an acknowledged reality of western science, much appreciated, to
the explores of a few Australian researchers. While the Moon's differing distance from the Sun,
i.e., lunur day or tithi is a strong element in weather conditions changes, there is overpowering
proof that the significant planets have a strong impact over environmental possibilities.
Research has uncovered that with regards to two times as numerous typhoons have spun to storm
force on the three days focused at new Moon and full Moon. The majority of "researchers"
overlook such logical prophetic realities on the grounds that "known laws of science" can't
clarify the hypothesis of the visionary realities. Since the "known laws of scince" are holy to the
"men of science", they make light of the entire inquiry despite the fact that it might mean
disregarding realities. The fact that some meteorologists in U.S.A makes it said. have observed
what they call a rate of connection between's years wealthy in precipitation and Jupiter's
developments. Essentially the West is driving the way in this.
The present-day meteorologists in India have not approached to test the techniques recorded in
antiquated deals with astro-meteorology due to the unusual and exceptional mentalities created in
their speculation by supporting a feeling of inadequacy keeping long periods of unfamiliar
guideline.

 Life in huge pieces of the seaside Andhra Pradesh ground to a halt on the evening of November
19, 1977. A tornado of colossal force had hit the coast killing north of 20,000 individuals and
obliterating property, crops, domesticated animals worth an expected three billion rupees. It was
not, be that as it may, absolutely surprising. Two days sooner an extreme typhoon had hit the
adjoining province of Tamil Nadu and most realized that the tempest was going towards them. In
any case, two days was not barely sufficient opportunity to get ready to get the effect of the
century's most crushing twister. The Meteorological Department had flopped again and
regardless of the assertion of the Government of Andhra Pradesh that "... the meteorological
office had given tempest admonitions and insurances had been taken" individuals realized who
were to be accused. The assertion was a brutal joke and an affront to the enduring individuals of
the State.

Not very many papers dared to call attention to the insufficiencies and informal perspectives of
the Meteorological Department of India. A few trusted that with the finish of undertaking Monex
and the establishment of a few additional scanners, all to the detriment of the experiencing
public, we ought to have had the option to concentrate on atmospheric conditions better. It is for
sure a tragic editorial on the indifference of the overall population that crores of rupees have
been wasted by the Meteorological Department without any inquiries posed and no questions
raised. A model in point is the practically visually impaired establishment of scanners on the
Andhra Pradesh Coast. The division values the way that scanners can follow a cyclonic way upto
400 km. Yet, with cyclonic paces being more than 100 km each hour this would allow a fourhour cautioning - barely sufficient opportunity to get ready to confront a tornado.
It appears to be that the disappointment of meteorologists is mostly because of an absence of
adequate 'logical receptiveness' which keeps them from considering extra-earthbound happenings
as being huge in the weather conditions determining process. Temperature, strain and
precipitation are immeasurably significant meteorological elements. To comprehend the climate
peculiarity completely it is important to develop a thorough image of the normal climatic
circumstances over the earth all in all and concentrate on those factors and their essential
causants. In the West a few specialists are progressively disposed to see these essential causants
as extra-earthbound something that the sages of India had propounded millennia prior in their
prophetic works. Be that as it may, tragically crystal gazing is no-no to our 'logical disapproved'
meteorologists.
Research directed in the West shows that the normal degree of incredible lakes like Nyasa,
Victoria and Albert as well as the Caspian Sea and other huge bowls of water is a lot higher at
points of most extreme sun powered action than close to least, Other investigations demonstrate
that times of exceptionally weighty precipitation agree with sunspot maxima. Flooding of the
Nile additionally follows the sunlight based cycle, being most noteworthy at sunspot maxima.
All considered it is sensible to reason that at such at such critical times., (maxima) there is higher
precipitation over the earth and there are more noteworthy number of tempests in the tropical
districts. Also the overall flow of the climate is more brutal with the goal that the temperature
over the globe is somewhat below typical normal. These impacts are most plainly characterized
in the Tropics and reach out towards the Poles along the chief warm occean flows.
Meteorological changes are additionally connected with geomagnetic storms which thus rely

 upon occasions occurring in the Sun. It is quite important that in 1957, a time of outstanding sun
based circumstances, the United States had a very enormous number of twisters.
Regardless there is sufficient proof to lay out that there is a connection among's sunlight based
and earthbound meteorological peculiarities. On the earth, there are varieties brought about by
ordinary warming and cooling of different areas of the environment due basically to the
developments of airmasses. Unsettling influences on the Sun influence various pieces of the
earth in various ways by delivering changes of temperature or strain, on mugginess, precipitation
and even tempests.

The sun based breeze is a flood of electrically charged particies which blows in accordance with
power of the Sun's attractive field. This is channeled into the polar districts by the world's
attractive field. When they get into the world's upper air little particles, for example, these go
about as 'seeds' on which precious stones of ice and snow can develop. Assuming that these ice
precious stones soften precipitation can be created. There might be alternate manners by which
sun powered action and the sun oriented breeze act to influence the climate. Investigations of
varieties in the sunlight based breeze as estimated from pioneer shuttle give another insight. The
sun oriented breeze is more 'windy' around the hour of most extreme sun powered action. This is
factual evidence that when the Sun is more dynamic, creating flares and spots, the sun oriented
breeze contains all the more rapid streams. Also these rapid streams are probably going to
influence the climate on the earth.
One more piece of direct proof connecting sunspots and the weather conditions comes from
records of the events of tempests and lightning in the United Kingdom. Dr. M. F. Stringfellow of
the
U.K. Power Council, Research Center has distributed charts which demonstrate that the yearly
lightning occurrence (which is a proportion of the quantity of lightning streaks happening in an
allowed region every year) intently follows the mean sunspot file.
The reason for the sunspot cycle is as yet a secret yet it appears to generally synchronize with the
time of Jupiter's circle around the Sun. Similarly as the Sun and the Moon raise tides in the seas
and the air of the earth and, surprisingly, in the strong earth itself, so does the gravity of the
planets raise tides on the outer layer of the Sun. Furthermore the tallness of the complete tide
relies upon the general arrangements of the planets.
The world's attractive fleld is by all accounts connected with the climate. Studies led by the U.S.
Climate Bureau show a consistent expansion in attractive power in England, Sweden and Egypt
as well as a consistent abatement in temperature. Simultaneously in Mexico, Canada and the
U.S.A. the attractive power is diminishing and the environment is getting hotter. Unexpected
changes in attractive force are trailed by sudden changes in climate. Furthermore again sun
oriented movement has a great deal to do with the world's attractive force.
An investigation of the absolute most annihilating tornadoes on the Andhra Pradesh coast shows
an extremely critical periodicity between sunspot maxima and the event of a significant typhoon.
The figures in table I show how intently significant typhoons in Andhra Pradesh follow snnspot

 maxima.
Table I
Year of Cyclone Sunspot maxima Zurich sunspot number
April 1752 1750 83
Dec. 1879 1787 and 1788

132 in 1787

Oct. 1800

45 in 1802

1802 and 1804

May 1832
1830 48 in 1804
71
May 1839

1837 138

Nov. 1879 1870 139
Nov. 1927 1928 78
Oct. 1936

1937 114

Oct. 1949

1947 152

Nov. 1969 1967 and 1968

190 in 1967

185 of every 1968

Checking out planetary situations on cyclonic days we go over another fascinating
correspondence. Any impartial individual would observe that this correspondence when utilized
related to sunspot maxima and ordinary weather conditions estimating procedures can be of huge
worth in foreseeing future typhoons.
For instance upon the arrival of the 1927 tornado there were free conjunctions among Jupiter and
Uranus and among Saturn and Ketu. In 1936 we find a Jupiter-Rahu combination. In 1949 there
was a Saturn-Ketu combination in Virgo, the decision indication of India. 1969 saw a SaturnJupiter resistance and a Rahu-Uranus combination, the last blend aspecting the twelfth from
Virgo. The 1977 twister synchronized with a Jupiter-Rahu square and Saturn in the twelfth
(misfortune, demise, and so on) from India's decision sign.
It appears to be that tornadoes on the Andhra Pradesh Coast are probably going to happen near
times of sunspot maxima when the planets Jupiter, Saturn, Rahu (Ketu) and Uranus structure
even free parts of kendra (square) and samagama (combination) between themselves. These
signs are fortified at whatever point either Virgo or the twelfth from it are tormented.
Whenever a speculated periodicity manifests in perceptions yet can't be demonstrated, the
conspicuous thing is to observe an actual motivation behind why such a period should exist.

 Everything point to the impact of the Sun on the earth and the impact of relative planetary
arrangements on the Sun. The Government as well as the Meteorological Departments owe a
hallowed obligation to general society to research all potential strategies for estimating twisters
and other normal climate peculiarities. Till now logical advancement in this field has been
impeded by exceptionally biased mentality towards Astrology - presumably the main science
which can give long-range weather conditions figures with some level of exactness. Proceeded
with bias must mean torment and passing to a large number of our

compatriots. The impact of planets on the weather conditions is in effect genuinely examined by
(among others) such renowned offices like the National Center for Atmospheric Research,
Boulder, Colorado, U.S.A., the U.S. Public Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and.
Appleton Laboratories in England. Numerous researchers at N.C.A.R. feel that even
mathematical demonstrating (virtual experience) of weather conditions can help in fostering an
expansive comprehension of the cycles engaged with changing both climate and environment yet
can't adapt to the intricacies expected for exact anticipating.

It will be seen that what continue in the accompanying entries are significant logical facts
according to Hindu academics. That the climate signs of one single day should frame the subject
of such a lot of computation with the Hindus in deciding the future farming possibility of the
land while to the unpracticed eye of a "man of science" the day shows up as detached or in any
case as some other day of the year clarifies that advanced science overall and meteorology
specifically are as yet a long ways behind in their examinations of the laws of nature.
Varahamihira starts with a hypothesis of mists and cloud arrangement, which to the understudy
of present day meteorology, may appear to be confusing. To decide how much downpour that
one might expect during the stormy season, one has simply to concentrate on the states of the
environment a half year sooner; as such, the barometrical circumstances at any one time decide
how much precipitation a half year thus. Long-range estimate was thusly a speciality with our
old meteorologists. In their lovely language, the mists become "pregnant" at specific periods of
the year and give "birth" to rain a half year after the fact. The side effects of the "origination" of
the mists ought to be seen during the times of the splendid fortnight of the long stretch of
Margasira (November-December) starting with that day when the Moon enters the asterism of
Poorvashadha. We are hence empowered to decide the actual day of the event of downpour from
an information on the day on which downpour has been "considered".
That, yet the actual hour of the event of precipitation not entirely set in stone; for says
Varahamihira, mists "imagining" during the day will be conveyed around evening time, and
mists considering around evening time will be "conveyed" during the day; mists "imagining" in
the sundown of the morning will be conveyed in the dusk of the evening, as well as the other
way around. Once more, on the off chance that at the hour of origination, mists have showed up
in the east, at the hour of birth, they will show up in the west, etc with different quarters.
Likewise, if at the hour of origination the breeze has blown from the east, then, at that point, at
the hour of downpour, it will blow from the contrary quarter.

 What are the indications of a solid "origination", which could at the appropriate time yield
overflow of downpour? To know them the spectator is approached to concentrate on every
barometrical peculiarity, like rainbows, mists, lightning and roar, from the start of the long
stretch of Margasira, for around four months. The overall climatic circumstances for a sound
origination of the mists are expressed to the follow: (1) e and pleasant breezes from the north, north-east and east. (2) Clear sky. (3) Soft, white,
profound corona round the Moon or the Sun. (4) Dark hued sky, 'dim as the crow's egg'. (5) Sky
cloudy with tremendous, splendid, thick mists. (6) Needle-formed mists or sword molded mists.
(7) Blood-red mists. (8) Rainbow toward the beginning of the day or in the evening. (9) Low,
meandering thunder of thunder. (10) Lightning. (11) The presence of the fake sun and (12)
Planets focusing in full structure and with delicate light.

Aside from these overall signs, certain peculiarities saw in specific periods of the year
demonstrate a solid "pregnancy" of the rainclouds. In the long stretch of Margasira (NovemberDecember) and Pausha (December-January) red sky in the first part of the day and in the
evening, mists encompassed by radiances, and not exactly regular cold with over the top fall of
snow indicate a solid origination. In the period of Magha (January-February) the indications of a
sound origination of mists are high breezes, ice and fog darkening the Sun and the Moon,
unnecessary cold, and dawn and dusk under mists. In the long stretches of Phalguna (FebruaryMarch) solid, vicious breezes; fine mists walking from one spot to another; broken and flawed
radiances round the Sun and the Moon; and brownish shade of the Sun, every one of these are
demonstrative of a bountiful precipitation 195 days later. Sky set apart by winds, mists and
radiances in the long periods of Chaitra (March-April) and Vaisakha (April-May) demonstrate a
solid origination of mists.
On the off chance that during the long stretches of origination (November-May) the "pregnant"
mists show up of the shade of pearls or silver or tamala leaf, or blue lotus, or of collyrium, then,
at that point, the downpour during the season will be abundant. Assuming the pregnant mists
ought to be presented to the sweltering beams of the Sun, or joined by delicate breezes, then, at
that point, the downpour that trails not very far behind 195 days will be inordinate.
Certain peculiarities, nonetheless, will more often than not invalidate any opportunity of future
precipitation. States of urban areas and pinnacles in mists; thunderclaps; dust-storms; brilliant
falls; appearance of comets overhead and of spots in the sun based circle; event of obscurations every one of these are signs that the "pregnancy" of the mists will "lose". Additionally, in the
event that there should be a fall of weighty downpour at the hour of origination, or then again
assuming the side effects of a sound pregnancy doled out to the few periods of the year ought to
fizzle, then, at that point, the mists will yield almost no downpour during the stormy season.
Three days in the long stretch of Ashadha (June-July) have been exceptionally chosen by our old
meteorologists for perception of environmental circumstances so as to decide the future
possibility of downpour. They are the days when in the lunar month of Ashadha the Moon goes
through the asterisms of Rohini, Swati and Uttarashadha. They have been separately called the
Rohini Yoga, Swati Yoga and Ashadhi Yoga days. It regressed on each Hindu Astronomer to
concentrate on the barometrical circumstances on these three days. Assuming he should see the

 sky covered with tremendous mists, snake like in shape, white in specific parts and dark in
specific different parts, or he

should see the sky covered with red mists or billows of the shade of blue lotus, and set apart by
lightning preceding dawn and after dusk he should rest assured about weighty downpours during
the stormy season. On the Swati Yoga day, assuming there should be a fall of downpour over the
course of constantly, there will be continuous downpour for quite some time in winter. Wind
from the east or north-east on the Ashadhi Yoga day demonstrates great downpour, great yields;
wind blowing from the south-east, southwest shows next to no precipitation later on. Consistent
hot breeze from the south-east or high wind from the southwest at dusk, on the Ashadhi Yoga
day, spells horrible starvation.
Whenever our old meteorologists could foresee downpour long ahead of time, it was no
troublesome thing for them to conjecture downpour in the short term. During this stormy season,
assuming the Sun at the hour of rising is especially splendid and red, or then again in the event
that the flavor of water is lifeless, or the shade of the sky is that of the cow's eye; if at the hour of
dawn or nightfall there ought to be seen the rainbow overhead; if salt starts to perspire; assuming
that fish in tanks bounce from water on the bank; assuming felines oftentimes scratch the ground;
on the off chance that metal vessels discharge an off-putting smell; assuming insects with their
eggs move starting with one spot then onto the next, there will be prompt precipitation.
One can comprehend these signs, for when downpour is normal and a low cloud is drawing
closer, the scent of metal vessels and of channels becomes perceptible as the lower pressure
makes a portion of the air getaway, and one notices an adjustment of the conduct of creatures and
bugs which respond to an adjustment of the barometrical circumstances. The red shade of the
Sun, the radiance around the Sun and the Moon and presence of mists, all show the murky state
of the atmoshere.
We had likewise downpour measuring previously. Falling precipitation, says Varahamihira,
should be gathered in a vessel whose limit is an adhaka. An adhaka has been characterized as the
quntity of precipitation which fills to the edge a vessel 20 crawls in breadth and 8 inches down.
Four such adhakas comprise a drona. Furnished with such a downpour check our antiquated
meteorologists had the option to quantify the specific" measure of downpour that fell during the
stormy season; and by associating how much downpour that fell with the variables that made
conceivable the fall of downpour, they had the option to anticipate the specific measure of
precipitation that could be anticipated in the blustery season. On the off chance that the
"origination" of mists is because of the relative multitude of five states of wind, downpour,
lightning, thunder and mists, says Varahamihira, then, at that point, the amount of ensuing
precipitation will be one drona, and this will fall over an area of 400 square miles. In the event
that the "origination" has been because of twist alone, the resultant precipitation will be three
adhakas; if because of thunder, twelve adhakas, different elements influencing precipitation.

These amounts of precipitation are, nonetheless, adjusted by how much downpour that falls
when the Moon passes from the asterism of Poorvashadha to that of Moola in the lunar month of

 Jyeshta (June-July). During this month assuming it downpours on the day on which the Moon is
in

the asterism or either Hasta or Poorvashadha or Mrigasira or Chitta or Revati or Dhanishta then, at that point, on the comparing days of the following lunar month, there will be 16 dronas
of precipitation; assuming it downpours on days when the Moon is in one or the other Sravana or
Makha or Anuradha or Bharani or Moola then on the relating days of the following month there
would be 14 dronas of precipitation; in the event that when the Moon lives in either Satabhisha
or Jyeshta or Swati, there would be 4 dronas of precipitation on the relating days of the blustery
season: if in Krittika 10 dronas; if in Poorvaphalguni 25 dronas; if in Visakha, Uttarashada, 20
dronas; if in Aslesha 13 dronas; if in Uttarabhadrapada or Uttaraphalguni or Rohini, 25 dronas; if
in Aswini, 13 dronas; if in Aridra, 18 dronas. In all the above cases, the ensuing precipitation
relies on the asterisms being unaffected by comets, meteors and so forth from the long stretch of
Jyeshta to the blustery season. On the off chance that the asterisms ought to endure by the
gathering together in them of the Sun, Saturn and Ketu (Moon's plunging hub) or by the course
of Mars through them or via planetary conjunctions, there will be neither downpour nor thriving
in the land; yet assuming benefic planets should go through the asterisms or then again assuming
the asterisms ought to stay unaffected in any of the ways portrayed above, humanity would be
cheerful.
The above notes depend on an investigation of Varahamihira's Brihat Samhita. It will be
perceived the way in which intently our ancestors concentrated on the environmental
circumstances to decide in advance, precisely, the degree, amount and nature of precipitation that
may be normal during the stormy season. Their hypothesis of the "origination" of mists looks
awesome to us who have been raised on Western science, yet having due regard for the insight of
the antiquated Hindu sages, it would be well to test the reality of their assertions.
The main any desire for precise weather conditions conjectures would be an amalgamation of
various methodologies. It is time our meteorologists comprehend the limits of ordinary
forecastings strategies, eliminate the signals of bias and pseudo logical haughtiness off their
eyes, and tap the tremendous possibilities that crystal gazing brings to the table. Any other way
people in the future will hold them at legitimate fault for biases of the most awful kind - biases
which could have the effect among life and passing for large number of individuals.

The guidelines specified in old books, as should have been visible from the over 10 verses are
straightforward and forgo expensive mechanical assembly. Based on the techniques given in old
works, we are empowered to make long reach gauges of precipitation as well as of the occurence
of downpours in half-lunar months (Paksha) and even of the day.
Our creator seems to have depended for the most part on Varahamihira and Madhaveeyam while
managing the standards of estimating precipitation.
The sun based entrance into Gemini (sankramand) is given a lot of noticeable quality. Certain
juxta-places of planets on that day are said to show whether or not during the year ahead, there
would be bounteous precipitation. Accentuation is laid on watery signs both in the Rasi and in

 the vargas.

For example, assuming that a planet possesses Cancer or Scorpio or Pisces in Rasi, Navamsa,
Drekkana and so forth, it is supposed to be in watery vargas or divisions.
Normal pheonomena, for example, the rainbow and the false Sun are totally given significance to
concentrate on the pattern of precipitation. In the blustery season (Sravana and Bhadrapada)
appearance of a rainbow in the east foreshadows no downpour. In different seasons such a
peculiarities shows precipitation. Verses 9, 10 and 11 empower us to foresee precipitation
Paksha-wise i.e., at regular intervals, in view of the full Moon and new Moon peculiarities.
Verse 12. Whenever twists blow from the upper east in the evening dusk of the full Moon day of
the lunar month of Ashadha, there will be deluge and subsequent lush vegetable life during the
resulting year. At the point when it downpours on the fourth day of the dull portion of the lunar
months Ashadha and Poorvabhadra star grouping of that very month, there will be rich
vegetation during the year following.
Verse 13. Assuming that the fifth day of the brilliant portion of the lunar month of Ashadha falls
on a Sunday, there will be little downpour; on a Monday, there will a deluge; Tuesday,
downpours will be furious; Wednesday, would get a tempest; Thursday, general thriving; Friday,
ruin and misfortune; and Saturday, hopelessness all over.
Verse 14. Whenever the Sun is in Aquarius and the heavenly body of Rohini corresponds with
the sixth lunar day, it will rain just a little; the seventh gives somewhat more; the eighth,
moderate rains; the ninth, abundant downpours; and the tenth, a storm.
NOTES
The incident of specific lunar days and asterisms when the Sun possesses specific signs, seem to
have a lot of importance in choosing the nature and degree of precipitation. Whenever the Sun is
in Aquarius and the tenth lunar day (Dasami) and Rohini concur, there will be extremely weighty
precipitation. These standards can be tried even by laymen and no unique specialized capabilities
are called for.

Verse 15. Whenever the Sun is in Poorvashadha, if on the first day, all the sky including the Sun
is viewed as totally covered by foreboding shadows, there will be some downpour (during the
long stretch of Gemini) when the Sun travels Aridra. Likewise, if on the second day, every one
of the sky are studded with foreboding shadows, there will be downpour to a great extent during
the last option part of Gemini and the initial segment of Cancer when the Sun travels the asterism
of Punarvasu. Correspondingly on the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, etc till the fourteenth day, on the
off chance that similar circumstances win, there will be downpours during the succeeding
months when the Sun will be in Pushyami, Aslesha, Makha, Pubba, till Moola in standard
progression.
NOTES
If anyway the sky are just somewhat covered, there will be downpour during specific days just

 inside the time of 13 1/3 days. Assuming that the sky are clear, than there will be no downpours.
Verse 16. From the Nakshatra involved by Venus after the finish of burning, precipitation can be
anticipated.
Refrains 17, 18, 19 and 20. The four asterisms starting from Bharani comprise the primary
mandala or cycle; the 4 start from Aridra is the second mandala; the 5 stars starting from Makha
is the third Mandala; the 3 stars starting from Swati is the fourth mandala; the 5 stars beginning
from Jyeshta is the fifth mandala and the 6 stars initiating from Dhanishta and finishing with
Aswini mark the sixth mandala. Whenever Venus ascends after burning in the fourth and sixth
commands bounteous downpours and plentiful harvests will win during the year. On the off
chance that he ascends in the first and second mandalas downpours will be sub optimal.
Assuming that he ascends in the third and fifth there will be little downpour and starvation will
torment individuals.
NOTES
Clearly our creator appears to have taken these subtleties from Varahamihira's Brihat Samhita
where the outcomes for Venus arising out of burning from the stars in the various mandalas have
been managed intricately.
Refrain 21. In the stormy season, when the Moon travels the seventh from Venus or the fifth, the
seventh or the ninth from Saturn, aspected by benefics, there will be weighty precipitation.
Refrain 22. Downpours can be anticipated when the ignition times of the different planets start
and end; when the Moon conjoins with different planets, when the Sun perspectives the six
mandalas portrayed above, on full Moon and new Moon days, when the Sun travels Cancer and
Capricorn, and when the Sun possesses the asterism of Aridra.
Verse 23. Whenever Mercury conjoins with Jupiter or Venus, or when Jupiter gets together with
Venus there will be downpour. Whenever Mars and Saturn conjoin with practically no angle or
relationship of benefics risk from fire, lightning and tempests can be anticipated.
Verse 24. Whenever mists encompassed by a brilliance looking like that of the Moon, white as
nectar, with a blue-dark spot in the middle, and pouring layers of water and looking like a flight
of stairs pass from west to east or east to west, there will be an exceptionally weighty deluge in a
little while.
Refrain 25. If in the blustery season, the dawn is seen to have a 'corona' in the east, and the early
afternoon (late morning) is set apart by the extraordinary hotness of the Sun's beams, there will
be downpour that day.
Refrain 26. Insects are seen to convey their eggs starting with one spot then onto the next
discontinuously; snakes have their sexual association or get on trees; cows hurry home to meet
their calves. These are on the whole characteristic of prompt precipitation.
Refrain 27. Felines scratch the ground with their hooks; little youngsters play on the water
building mud-banks and dams. These demonstrate precipitation.
Refrain 28. Slopes sparkle a good ways off and appear to have a blue shading; caves are seen to
have a covering of thick fog: and the circle of the Moon has a round red line, the shading being

 that of the eyes of the hen. These are indications of quick downpour.
Refrain 29. Chameleons move up trees and gaze moronically at the sky. Cows toe appear to
gaze upwards. These show prompt downpour.
Verse 30. Cocks crowing in the day gazing upward and glimmers of lightning set apart in the
upper east signify weighty downpours.

Refrain 31. There will be rains right away assuming the Moon is seen to have the shade of
honey or of the eyes of parrots or pigeons; or the circle of the Moon however wrapped in mists,
appears to radiate a brilliance round in shape (pratichandra).
NOTES
In the prior parts signs or nimithas or demonstrative signs have been managed bearing on
different parts of horoscopy or prasna. In Stanzas 26 to 31, the creator offers specific
demonstrative hints, which plainly recommend there would be quick rains and so forth, in the
blustery season.
Fourteen nimittas referenced in the texts have been given underneath for the data of the peruser:
1.

Carrying of eggs by subterranean insects from one spot to another

2.

Snakes climbing trees and having sex.

3.

Cows hurrying home to meet their posterity.

4.

Cats scratching the ground.

5.

Young youngsters building dams mud banks.

6.

Hills a ways off seeming to have a blue shading.

7.

Thick fog covering caves.

8.

The Moon's circle having a round red line.

9.

Chameleons climbing trees and gazing at the sky.

10.

Cows gazing toward the sky.

11.

Cocks crowing in the day.

12.

Flashes of lightning showing up in the north-east.

13.

The Moon's shading giving off an impression of being that of honey or the eyes of parrots.

14.

The appearance of false moon or pratichandra.

It is obvious from the rundown of characteristic signs given above how profound were the
perceptions of nature made by our old sages and how shallow has been our how own might
interpret nature as well as the nimittas encapsulated in old books. Sir Walter Scott's Quentin
Durward records that once when King Louis and his company were getting back to Paris, they
viewed as on the way, that washermen with washed garments on the backs of jackasses were

 hurrying home. Whenever they were inquired as to why they were surging hurriedly they said
that the jackasses had lifted their ears upwards which implied there would be quick downpour.
Furthermore in a matter of moments the sky poured heavy rains. Varahamihira, the praised
mathematician, crystal gazer and stargazer, has managed the subject of precipitation widely in
his Brihat Samhita and perusers are encouraged to go through this work of art.

Verse 32. Pearls of thunder crash in the evening; dark red glimmers of easing up are seen during
day time, cold breezes blow from the East.
Verse 33. Youthful growing leaves raise their dabs high, birds unreservedly wash in water or in
dust, snakes relax in the daylight lying on grass.
Refrain 34. Mists accept the shade of peacock, parrot, wild crow, or chataka bird and appear to
have the state of waves, slopes, turtle, pigs and fishes.
Verse 35. A rainbow at the crack of dawn or at dusk, a thick line like that of an iron rock is seen,
the fake Sun, glimmers of easing up, a radiance straight and rainbow hued Parivesha.
Refrain 36. A rising heap of Sun's beams shoot-out justlike slopes, mists come nearer to the
earth, with lightning storm.
Refrain 37. Water becomes boring, the sky gets the shade of the cow's eyes, a sparkle in the 8
Diks, salt melts, the sky get a gleam very much like that of crow's eggs, twists halt, frogs croak
and fishes spring up above water.
NOTES
Verses 32 to 37 offer other demonstrative hints for sure fire precipitation.
Verse 38. Whenever God Subramanya was approached to clarify the different indications of
precipitation, the answer given by the God is given underneath.
Refrain 39. Assuming the first of the lunar month Chaitra turns out to be a Sunday, there will be
no downpours in the initial segment of the year. During the second part, the downpours will be
unevenly appropriated. Assuming it is Monday, downpours will start late and go on in overflow.
Assuming that it is Tuesday, it will rain on uneven lots.
Verse 40. Assuming that it is Wedneday, there will be great downpours. Thursday acquires a
storm and subsequent cataclysms. Friday acquires success however rains are inadequate; and
Saturday causes sicknesses, loss of yields and high profound quality.
Verse 41. Precipitation to be anticipated based on various week days falling on the first day of
Chaitra has been clarified. The impacts of the asterism falling in Capricorn and Aries entrances
will be currently managed.
Verses 42 to 44. Whenever the Sun enters Aries or Capricorn in the asterism of Aswini,
occasional downpours will be ordinary; Bharani, great harvests, however numerous catastrophes
might hit individuals; Krittika, little precipitation and more abuse of the rulers; Rohini,
downpour to start with and annihilation of steers; Mrigasira, little downpour before all else and
great rains thusly; Aridra, bounteous downpours and some obliteration of yields; Punarvasu,

 downpours initially, sickness to cows and men; Pushyami, a lot of downpours and inconvenience
from terrible characters; Aslesha, extreme downpours, dread from hoodlums and risk of war;
Makha, copious downpours, dread from rulers and annihilation to crops; Pubba and Uttara,
annihilation to adversaries, burdens to Brahmins and Sudras and abundant harvests.
Refrains 45 and 46. At the point when the Sun enters Aries or Capricorn in the group of stars of
Hasta, thriving and great wellbeing are demonstrated; Chitta, little downpour, great wellbeing
and disasters; Swatj, copious downpours and success in the nation; Visakha, downpours to a
great extent, general flourishing in the nation, and torment to Sudras; Anuradha and Jyeshta, ruin
to crops, great downpours; Moola, infections to cows and men, block to the exhibition of
customs by Brahmins, and weighty downpours.

Refrains 47, 48 and 49. At the point when the Sun enters Aries or Capricorn in the star grouping
of Poorva-shadha, there will be great yields, weighty precipitation and ruin eventually;
Uttarashadha, shortage of downpours; Sravana, rains and harvests ample; Dhanishta, downpours
at the outset, obliteration of yields and dry spell eventually; Satabhisha, weighty downpours and
abundant accessibility of substandard grains; Poorvabhadra, great precipitation; Uttarabhadra,
little precipitation, individuals without great activities and mental misery; and Revati, no
downpours at the appropriate seasons despite everything no starvations.
Verses 50 to 54. On the off chance that the Sun's entrance into Aries happens on the first lunar
day, there will be no downpours; the second and third lunar days, no increment of harvests
however there will be downpours; fourth, inordinate deluge, disasters and floods; fifth, weighty
downpours and great yields; sixth, weighty battling in the nation; seventh, inconveniences from
lords however there will be standard rains and harm to grain; in the eighth, appropriate
downpours and prosperous yields; the ninth, great harvests and numerous cataclysms; tenth,
weighty downpours, catastrophes and hopelessness; eleventh, great downpours, increment of
sub-par grains and auxiliary catastrophes to individuals; twelfth and thirteenth, shortage of
downpour; and inconveniences from criminals; fourteenth, storm toward the start, yet no
downpours following 12 days; and new Moon or full Moon, squabbles and wars, abundant
downpours, increment of yields.
Verses 55 to 59. The consequences of the Sun's entrance into Aries and different Karanas are:
Bava, incredible downpours and ills to the nation and increment of yields; Vyaghra, downpours
at the appropriate seasons, difficulty to cows and starvation conditions; Kaulava, lopsided, not
well dispersed precipitation and ills of various sorts; Khara, increment of cows, abundance and
grains, downpours will be exorbitant for 12 days; Gara, weighty rains just in the start of the year;
Vanija, no downpour at the outset, yet inordinate downpours toward the year's end and episode
of infections; Vishti, sicknesses to cows, increment of yields, appropriate downpours and
disasters to individuals; Sakuna, same as Vishti, however more serious in evil; Chatushpada,
storm and loss of harvests; Naga, overflowing downpours and increment of yields; and
Kimsthugna, downpours at the legitimate time, little misfortune to crops yet in the end grains
develop copiously.
Refrains 60 and 61. If at the hour of the Sun's entrance into Aries, Aries, Libra or Scorpio rises,
shortage of downpours will be the outcome; if Leo, lopsided circulation of downpours; if

 Scorpio, downpours will be moderate; in the excess signs, the impacts will be bounteous rains
and general thriving. However, on the off chance that Virgo rises, downpours will be close to
nothing and yields poor.
Verses 62, 63 and 64. On the off chance that the Sun possesses the ascendant at the hour of the
sun based entrance into Aries, legitimate rains however late will happen; assuming the Moon is
in the ascendant, there will be abundant rains and yields; if Mars, no downpours in the first place
or the end; if Mercury, there will be he,avy downpours, assuming the sign is watery. Any other
way rains will be extremely inadequate; if Jupiter, no downpour in the first place except for just a
little misfortune to crops; if Venus, downpours at ill-advised seasons, extraordinary conflict,
catastrophes to rulers, sicknesses to steers, great harvest yield and thriving to individuals; if
Saturn, shortage of downpours, burden from cheats and different difficulties and general sadness;
and Rahu or Ketu in a watery sign, a lot of downpours.
Refrain 65. Assuming the rising sign at the hour of the Sun's entrance into Aries is beset by
more defects (doshas) like the presence of Gulika, and so forth, there will be no downpours and
starvation conditions will win in the land.
Verse 66. On the off chance that the ascendant at the hour of the Sun's entrance into Aries turns
out to be a watery sign and is aspected by watery planets, there will be appropriate downpours.
Assuming the sign is a searing one and is related with or aspected by red hot planets, there will
be no downpour.
Verse 57. By concentrating on the sunlight based entrance into Aries the impacts for one entire
year can be anticipated. By looking at the month to month entrance the impacts of the month can
be anticipated. Assuming that the ascendant at the hour of the sun oriented section is related with
or aspected by benefic planets, there will be great downpours and good yields during the year or
the month concerned. In the event that the ascendant is beset by malefics, there will be no
downpours and resulting disappointment of harvests.

Verses 68 to 70. At the point when the sun oriented entrance ends up falling on days controlled
by the asterisms Rohini, Anuradha, Jyeshta, Uttarashadha, Abhijit, Sravana, Dhanishta, the year
is known as Indra Mandala. The year will be cheerful and prosperous. At the point when the
entrance falls on days controlled by Bharani, Krittika, Pushyami, Makha, Pubba, Visakha and
Poorvabhadra, the year is known as Agni Mandala, The impact will be dread from fire, neediness
all over the place, crops fizzle and harvest time crops are obliterated. At the point when the
entrance falls on days controlled by Mrigasira, Punarvasu, Uttara, Hasta, Chitta, Swati, then, at
that point, the year has Vayu Mandala. Dread from lords, tempests and shortage of downpours
will be the outcome. At the point when the entrance happens on days managed by Aridra,
Aslesha, Moola, Poorvashadha, Satabhisha, Uttarabhadra or Revati, then, at that point, the year
has Varuna Mandala. Great rains and general success will result.
Refrain 71. Assuming that the Sun turns out to be in Kimsthugna, Kola or Sakuna the
Sankramana Purusha is supposed to be in sthiti (or soundness). The impact will be extraordinary
ascent in costs. In the event that the Sankramana Purusha turns out to be in Naga, Gaja, Khara or
Chathushpada, then, at that point, he is supposed to be in 'Nishanna' or 'fixed'. The impact will be

 moderate costs. Assuming the Purusha turns out to be in Vyaghra, Vishti, Simha and Gara, he is
injhe condition of sayana or rest. Costs will be low.

Verse 72. Whenever an inquiry with respect to downpours is made, the accompanying, whenever
seen or felt, demonstrates that there will be downpours. The examiner contacts any watery things
as wet garments, water, sea-going plants, organic products, and so on; he remains close to a
watery spot, washes in water, drinks water; any sound communicating water and watery
substance is heard.
Refrain 73. In the case of crying tears, sniffing, water plunging through the nose or going into a
watery spot is seen, there will be weighty precipitation.
Verse 74. If at the time a corona is seen round the Sun or the Moon, or the sky is obscured by
mists, there will be an incredible deluge. The course where the downpours will pour is to be
discovered by noticing cautiously the side of the examiner in which wetness is noticed.
Verse 75. If at the hour of the inquiry articles, for example, alcohol, spread, a pregnant lady,
vessel containing water, he-bison, elephant, Brahmin, are located, there will be downpours.
Verse 76. Assuming that the examiner ends up contacting his face, eyes, balls, and so forth, or
when he discharges pee at the hour of the question, there will be downpour.
Verses 77 and 78. Pisces, Cancer, Capricorn, Aquarius, Taurus, Libra and Scorpio are watery
signs. From Pisces to Scorpio in the above request the watery signs become less and less watery.
The leftover ones are non-watery. The Moon and Venus are watery planets. Mercury and Jupiter
in watery signs are amphibian.
Refrain 79. In an inquiry bearing on precipitation, the Sun and Mars, the Moon and Venus and
Mercury and Jupiter two by two individually show no downpour right away, weighty rains and
moderate downpours.
Refrain 80. Assuming the principal letter in the inquiry turns out to be ghosha letters or a long
vowel, there will be downpour right away; in the event that it is khara or atikhara or anunasika,
there will be no downpour.

NOTES
The vargas are given
Consonants

Vargas

1

Khara 2

3

Atikhara Mridu
Ghosha

5

4

below.

 Anunasika
Ka-Varga

ka

Cha „ cha

kha

ga

gha

chcha ja

jha

jna

Ta „ ta

tta

da

dha

na

Tha ,, tha

ttha da

dha

Na

Dad „ pa

pha

bha

ma

ba

nga

Assume the first letter in the question is mama. It falls under anunasika, and that implies there
will be no downpour.
Verse 81. In the event that a watery planet involves a non-watery sign, there will be downpour
soon. Assuming that a non-watery planet possesses a watery sign, there will be downpour after
some postponement. A watery planet in a watery sign acquires normal downpours. A non-watery
planet in a non-watery sign gets no downpour.
Refrain 82. What is said above is relevant to Kupa Prasna (burrowing wells) too. In an inquiry
bearing on precipitation it can likewise be utilized. Here adha implies soon or beneath and upari
implies at the top or eventually.
Refrain 83. In the brilliant portion of the month, if benefics possess the first, second, third,
fourth, seventh and eighth houses which should be watery signs, or the Moon is in an amphibian
sign, there will be downpour.
Refrain 84. On the off chance that at the hour of prasna, the second or the third house turns out
to be a watery sign, then, at that point, inside 20 days the downpours will be weighty to such an
extent that floods will ascend in streams.
Verse 85. If at the hour of inquiry (in the stormy season) Saturn and Mars are in the seventh
house from the Sun or the Moon, or in the fourth or eighth or the second or the third from the
ascendant, there will be overflowing downpours.
NOTES
In one more form of the Mss. we find sitarki (Venus and Saturn) rather than vakrarki (Mars and
Saturn). Venus can never involve the seventh from the Sun.
Verse 86. In the event that at the hour of a question about downpour during the stormy season,
the Moon is in the ascendant which should be a watery sign; or in the brilliant a large portion of
the Moon is in a quadrant, there will be downpour out of nowhere. Proportionately as a benefic
or a malefic angles the Moon, the downpour will be extremely weighty, or scant. By subbing
Venus in the spot of the Moon comparative outcomes can be anticipated.
Refrain 87. In an inquiry with respect to floods, if the Moon or Mercury or Jupiter or Venus
aspected by benefics involves the ascendant or a quadrant, there will be high floods.
Verse 88. Assuming that the planets referenced in the above section are aspected by malefics or

 are joined by them, the downpours will be very little. Assuming the Arudha or Chatra is a watery
sign and has in it a watery planet, there will be weighty downpour.
NOTES
It is said that verse 87 is to be applied for foreseeing floods, which follow as an outcome,
weighty downpours. In the event that the benefics alluded to are in the fourth, floods are said to
result from springs and wells; in the seventh, streams will grow bringing about floods; and in the
tenth floods will be because of weighty downpours. Malefic planets influencing the benefics
hinder precipitation. In the event that either the Arudha Rasi or Chatra Rasi turns out to be
watery, likewise weighty precipitation can be anticipated.
Refrain 89. The fourth administers the water underground as in springs or wells, the seventh
oversees the water in streams and the tenth oversees the water because of downpours.
Refrains 90 and 91. However the previously mentioned signs and blends show weighty
downpours, in the event that the ascendant has the associatian or perspective or Navamsa or
Drekkana of Mercury, there will be no downpours, being upset by winds. If Mars, Mercury,
Saturn or Rahu possesses quadrants, downpours will be immediately disseminated by
unfavorable tempests and tornadoes.
Verse 92. On the off chance that the ascendant which should be a watery sign is involved by the
Moon and Venus or then again if Arudha aspected by Venus and the Moon turns out to be a
watery sign, there will be downpours.

Verse 93. If Arudha, the rising sign, and Chatra sign, all the three, end up being Prishtodaya
signs, then, at that point, there will be downpour. If around then Venus and the Moon are in
worship, the downpours will go on for the entire of that day.
Refrain 94. On the off chance that Mars, Mercury, Saturn and Rahu involve quadrants, there
will be no downpours, being upset by antagonistic breezes. Assuming that they are related with
benefics, there will be some downpour.
Refrain 95. Assuming that Rahu and Saturn involve watery signs, the downpours will be
charming. In the event that these are aspected by the Moon and Venus, downpours will be
exceptionally weighty truly hurting.
Verses 96 and 97. Pisces, Cancer, the last option part of Capricorn, Taurus, Libra, Scorpio,
Virgo and Aquarius are watery signs. Among planets, the Moon and Venus are amphibian ones.
Mercury and Jupiter in amphibian signs are watery. The Sun, Mars, Saturn and Rahu in watery
signs cause a little amount of precipitation.

Koopa Prasna

Verse 1. In this section, I will detail 'Kupa Prasna', clarifying whether water can be had in the
event that a well is burrowed at a specific spot.

 Refrain 2. From certain perspectives, the best an ideal opportunity for burrowing wells is four
months from Capricorn while as per some others, it should be done in the period of Pisces and 90
days succeeding it.
Refrain 3. By a cautious examination of snake-slopes, trees, grass and certain natural products,
and by Kupa Prasna, regardless of whether a water layer can be found in a specific spot, can be
known in advance. The ideal opportunity for analyzing it has been given in the last refrain. The
time should be with the end goal that there should be no trouble in testing the idea of the dirt.
Verse 4. Whenever an inquiry is made in regards to this, one should see whether there is water or
any watery substance close, or regardless of whether the principal letter, in the prasna, is a jala
akshara (watery letters in order) or whether the rising sign, Arudha and the planets are solid and
ideal, or whether any signs propose the presence of water.
Verses 5 and 6. If at the hour of inquiry, a canine eater, (chandala), moving young lady, an
individual who has lost his abundance, a Brahmin or a kirata (a mountain dweller) is seen; or
then again in the event that a rainbow is seen overhead, drinking water can be had in the spot
chose. The water will be from an old very much covered underground. Assuming the examiner
ends up contacting his neck or his face, at the hour of the inquiry, there will be water in the chose
spot. In the event that he contacts his ears, water can be utilized subsequent to playing out the
important purificatory measures. On the off chance that not, individuals will fall in the well and
bite the dust.
Refrain 7. Regardless of whether there is water underground is to be found out from the
accompanying yogas, based on the inquiry time.
Refrain 8. Assuming the ascendant is a moveable sign and Rahu and the Moon go along with it,
there will be water in the chose spot. At the point when the Sun involves the tenth and Jupiter
possesses the fourth, there will be water.
Refrain 9. At the point when the Moon involves the ascendant turning out to be a watery sign,
there will be water. When a malefic is in the fourth and the Moon joins the ascendant, there will
be underground water.
Refrain 10. Assuming the Moon is in Pisces, aspected by Jupiter and Venus and Arudha is
Virgo; in the event that Virgo being Arudha is fixed in the middle of the Moon and Venus, water
will be found.
Refrain 11. Assuming Capricorn rises, Venus is in Libra, Jupiter is in Pisces and the Moon is in
Cancer, or Mercury and Rahu consolidate in a similar sign and the Moon is in Gemini, there will
be water in the chose spot.

Verse 12. In the event that Venus and the Moon are magnified and aspected by weakened
planets or the Arudha or the ascendant is Taurus involved by the Moon, there will be an old all
around covered underground.
Verse 13. Whenever Lagna is a decent sign involved by Venus and Saturn or the Moon is in Leo
and Arudba is a watery sign, there will be just some water in the well.

 Verse 14. Whenever Arudha is Pisces, the Moon is in Virgo and Jupiter possesses Gemini, there
will be water. Accordingly we have 13 yogas, other than two given in the stanzas 13 and
14. Signs of having an old well are additionally given.
Refrain 15. There will be no water in the all around burrowed, assuming the Moon is in Taurus
and Rahu is in Scorpio.
Refrain 16. From the above yogas, signs and different wellsprings of data, in the event that you
come to reason that water is accessible, the course where the well is to be burrowed can be
known from the accompanying.
Verse 17. If at the hour of inquiry the examiner feels the left half of his body, it implies water
can be situated in the south-west; any organ over the neck, in the north-east; the right half of his
body and any organ beneath the neck, north-west.
Verse 18. On the off chance that he contacts any hard spot in his body, no water can be found;
and different spots of body are positive for getting water. A plump spot shows water in a dirty
sloppy spot; temple signifies a rough spot.
Verse 19. Subsequent to inspecting these overall signs and yogas, in the event that one reasons
that there is water, a Chandra Gupti Chakra is to be drawn and not set in stone.
Refrains 20, 21, 22 and 23. One should situate easily confronting the east if the Prasna Rekha
and the graph (chakra) to be drawn is from the morning till early afternoon; south from early
afternoon to dusk; west from nightfall to 12 PM; and north from 12 PM to next dawn.
Eight lines ought to be attracted longitudinally to be crossed by five lines to be drawn on a level
plane. The outcome is 28 squares connoting the 28 asterisms and Chandra Gupti Chakra.
In this outline initiating from the first square enter numbers 1 to 5 evenly, then, at that point, 6 in
an upward direction down beneath; and 7, 8 and 9 on a level plane towards the left; under 9
imprint 10 furthermore on a level plane 11, 12, 13 and 14 towards the right; over 14 imprint 15
and afterward 16. Starting from the last square, to 16, mark the standard request seventeenth to
28th.
Refrains 24 and 25. Separating a day's span, viz., 60 ghatikas by 28, every asterism gets 2 1/7
ghatikas. Partitioning the hour of question in ghatikas 2 1/7, we get dinarsha counted from
Aswini. The asterism demonstrated by the longitude of the ascendant at the hour of question is
udaya nakshatra.
Refrain 26. The Dinarsha is to be embedded in the first square. Include in the request set apart in
the outline till the udaya nakshatra.
Refrain 27. Count from udaya-nakshatra to the asterism held by the Moon as per the request for
the chart. The subsequent square demonstrates where the well must be burrowed. Similarly as on
account of the Moon, the asterism held by different planets can likewise be thought of.
NOTES
The above refrains give a curious strategy for finding the water source, by consdering what is

 called Chandra Gupti Chakra. This is drawn beneath according to verses 20 to 23.

Concentrate on the refrains 20 to 27, keeping this graph before you. This will empower perusers
to comprehend the strategy for projecting the graph without trouble. Accepting that the ascendant
is 15° Aquarius, the hour of question is 35 ghatis and the asterism for the Moon's position is
Mrigasira and for the longitude of the ascendant the asterism is Satabhisha, we show up where
water is accessible consequently:
Partitioning 35, the hour of inquiry, by 2 1/7, we get (35/2 1/7) remainder 16 which implies the
Dinarsha is the seventeenth from Aswini, viz., Anuradha.
As the ascendant is 15° Aquarius the relating asterism will be Satabhisha. Along these lines:
Dinarsha is Anuradha, Udaya Nakshatra Satabhisha, Moon's Nakshatra Mrigasira. Counting
from Dinarsha to udaya nakshatra we get (see graph) the square stamped
8. Counting from udaya nakshatra (square 8) to the Moon's Nakshatra in the request for the graph
we get Mrigasira No. 16 in the square. This specific square, which is in the S.E., shows where
water will be accessible. This chart might be considered as an arrangement or a blue print and the
specific area can be distinguished.
I should say that I have attempted this technique effectively on account of three of my
companions to assist them with finding where water could be found for burrowing wells.
Refrain 28. A few incredible authors have remembered Dinarsha for working Chandra Gupti
Chakra while other extraordinary journalists have avoided it.
Refrain 29. As per the last option school, the primary square in the graph ought to be considered
as Aswini. From this is to be counted the asterism involved by a watery planet. That division will
show where the well must be burrowed.
Verse 30. Here is the third view. The Udayanakshatra is to be entered in the third square and
from this is to be counted the Nakshatra held by a watery planet. This division additionally will
give where the well must be burrowed.
Verse 31. The three perspectives given by scholarly men have been referenced. A fourth view
likewise can be added.
Verses 32, 33 and 34. Think about the main division in the chart as Aswini, and rely on till the
square where Chandra Nakshatra stands. Accept this as Dinarsha, and rely on till the Chandra
Nakshatra again and mark it. Yet again accept this obvious square as udaya nakshatra and
depend on the asterism where the Moon stands. This will be one of the places where the well
must be developed. Rather than the Moon we can consider the asterisms involved by Jupiter or
Venus.

NOTES
As indicated by this strategy, No. 1 in the graph is Aswini. In our model: counting from Aswini
to the asterism held by the Moon, viz., Mrigasira we see No. 5 in the chart. This is styled as

 Dinarsha; counting again from this we get in the chart No. 9.
This can be treated as udaya nakshatra. Again counting 5 from this we get 23. This denotes the
west and the spot demonstrates the presence of water.
Verses 35 and 36. Whenever this question is considered before early afternoon, count from
Aswini and the third square will be Krittika. In the early evening count from Pushyami, and the
third square will be Makha. After nightfall, count from Swati and the third division will be
Anuradha. After 12 PM, count from Abhijit, and the third division is Dhanishta. Here is a short
portrayal of the Chandra Gupti Chakra.
NOTES

Four distinct sorts are given, and any of them can be followed.
Verse 37. Proportionately as at the hour of inquiry the ascendant is moveable, fixed or normal,
there will be a little spring, many springs or two springs.
Verse 38. In specific mixtures, there might be old wells covered underneath and to discover
where they are, the accompanying definitive blends will be significantly helpful.
Verse 39. Assuming Arudha is a decent sign, Taurus is the ascendant and the Moon involves it,
then, at that point, it means that an old well exists in the compound.
Refrain 40. At the point when the Moon is in Scorpio and Arudha turns out to be Taurus
involved by Venus; or when Jupiter is in the tenth and the Moon and Venus are in the fourth,
there is an old well.
Refrain 41. The Moon and Venus in praise show two old wells far underneath the earth. The
Sun in the seventh from Arudha and the Moon in the seventh from the ascendant demonstrate an
old lowered well.
Refrains 42 to 44. Assuming the Moon and Rahu possess the ascendant, or on the other hand
assuming Arudha being Aquarius is involved by the Moon and Venus; or then again on the off
chance that the ascendant is a decent sign and the Moon and Venus possess it; assuming Jupiter
and Venus are in the fourth; or the Moon is in the tenth and Venus is in Virgo; or Venus is in the
seventh and the Moon in the fourth shrouded by a radiance overhead at the hour of question every one of these demonstrate that old wells are covered underneath in the compound.
Verse 45. This multitude of mixes are Kupa yogas which can be conventionally utilized. To
answer an inquiry whether any well can be found in a specific spot, different signs ought to
likewise be investigated.
Verse 46. While the rising sign and Chathra sign are watery, and the Moon is in Arudha or the
Sun is related to Rahu or Ketu in a watery sign, there is a well at the undeniable spot.
Verse 47. Saturn in the ascendant and the Moon in the tenth; or Jupiter in the fourth, Rahu in the
seventh and the Sun in the tenth show old lowered wells.
Verse 48. Whenever Rahu is related to the Sun and the Moon in the fourth, or the Sun has a

 corona encompassing his plate, the sign is the presence of an old very much concealed to see.

Refrains 49 and 50. The ascendant, Arudha and Chathra are watery signs, of which the
ascendant should be a proper sign; or at the hour of inquiry, an outcaste shows up carelessly; or a
moving young lady, an individual whose abundance is taken, or a Brahmin or a mountain
climber shows up; or a rainbow is found overhead; they demonstrate an old well can be found in
the proposed spot however covered by the earth.
Verses 51 and 52. Having along these lines determined the presence of an old well, the flavor of
the water must be noted from the planet possessing the fourth house or aspecting the fourth
house, or the ruler of Lagna Navamsa. The Sun oversees corrosive or sweltering taste, the Moon
saltish, Mars harsh taste, Jupiter pleasantness, Venus harshness and Saturn impactful taste and
Mercury a combination of all.
Verse 53. The flavor of water can likewise be known from the main letter contained in the
question of the individual. A (*) varga, the Moon's taste; Kha (*) varga, taste of Mars; Cha (*)
varga, Mercury's; Ta (*) varga, Jupiter's; Tha (*) varga, Venus'; Pa (*) varga, Saturn's; Ya (*)
varga, Rahu's; and Sa (*) varga, the Sun's.
Rahu's taste is 'to have no taste' or lifeless taste.
Refrain 54. The different developments of the examiner ought to be painstakingly noted and the
travel of the Moon should be concentrated and afterward the event of water, where a well must
be burrowed and what the profundity of the well is to be, and so on, learned.
Verse 55. Wells must be delved in the places where the eyes, or the face or the mouths of Nadis
of Vastu Purusha stand. However, care should be taken that those segments in the assemblage of
Vastu Purusha which are associated with Agni are barred.
NOTES
In Silpa Sastras we have continuous notice of Vastu Purusha. The head of Vastu Purusha is in the
north-east and the legs are in the south-west. This is the motivation behind why wells are to be
built in the north-east. Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries and Taurus and western course are
great. Perusers are alluded to my book Muhurtha for additional subtleties.
Verse 56. The compound of the examiner ought to be partitioned into 12 signs; of these the
heading connoted by Aquarius is awesome (uttama); Pisces and Aries are customary
(madhyama); and Capricorn is futile (adhama).
Refrain 57. A well ought not be dove in the space implied by Virgo. Whenever burrowed, the
proprietor will kick the bucket an unnatural demise.
Verse 58. In the event that the Sun possesses the ascendant, the water will be exceptionally
somewhere down in the ground; assuming Mars involves the ascendant, the progression of water
will be among rocks; and assuming Rahu or Saturn possesses the rising sign, there will be no
water stream.
Refrain 59. Assuming that the rising sign is involved by the Moon and Venus, the well will be

 full; if by Jupiter and Mercury, there will be moderate water. Assuming Mercury and the Moon
are in the ascendant, there will be sand under from which water will grow out. On the off chance
that the Sun and Mars are in the ascendant, water will issue out of rocks.
Refrain 60. At the point when Venus possesses the ascendant, water will have great taste. Jupiter
in the ascendant makes the water fairly great. Saturn in a watery sign delivers the water saline
and the amount additionally will be tiny. Rahu in the rising sign makes the well dry and
waterless.
Verse 61. The profundity of the water-layer not entirely settled from the number showed by the
letters in the primary word communicated by the examiner; or the number demonstrated by the
beams of planets or signs.
Verse 62. The beams of the planets that possess the ascendant or the fourth demonstrate the
profundity of the well. On the off chance that there are more planets, the most grounded ought to
be taken. In watery spots (anupadesa) the action is to be by cubits. Where there is water
alongside trees with some restraint, for example semi-dry (jangala), the estimation is to be half;
in dry deserts, the estimation is to be by the normal tallness of man. The number is to be outfitted
by Graha Rasmis or planetary beams.
Refrain 63. In Kupa Prasna, the Rasmis or beams of planets are: the Sun - 16; the Moon - 4;
Mars - 10; Mercury - 9; Jupiter 7; Venus - 5; and Saturn - 21.
Refrain 64. The beams for the different signs starting from Aries individually are: 7, 8, 12, 11,
12, 6, 9, 7, 13, 7, 8 and 27.
Verse 65. These beams can be utilized to quantify how much cash lost concerning questions
bearing on robbery, the sum acquired and to gauge the time expected for proceeding to return.
Verses 66 and 67. In Kupa Prasna, no separation need be made between the rising sign and
Arudha. It is irrelevant whether the yoga-karaka planets involve the rising sign or Arudha. Full
impacts will happen. Also, assuming the Sun's radiance and different signs portrayed are seen in
full, one can intensely anticipate that a well can be tracked down lowered in the chose spot.
Verse 68. In both Varsha Prasna and Kupa Prasna, watery planets in non-watery signs show next
to no water and the water layer extremely low and the downpours will be late and the ascent of
water in the streams will be more slow still. Non-watery planets in non-watery signs give a dry
waterless soil. Watery planets in watery signs give a watery layer even at the surface.
Downpours will pour in, and floods will gag the streams.
Verse 69. The standards, proposed in the previous parts for anticipating precipitation based on
the primary letter of the inquiry, can be utilized as to qustions on burrowing wells.
Verse 70. Note the lapsed ghatikas and vighatikas from dawn till the hour of the inquiry.
Increase this by 28 and separation the item by 60. The rest of the Nakshatra counted from
Aswini. This is known as "Dinarsha".

NOTES Example:

 a)

Let the lapsed period from dawn to the hour of question be 35 gh. 30 vgh. = 35.5 gh.

b)

Multiplying this by 28, we get 35.5 x 28 = 994.

c)

Dividing 994 by 60, we get 994/60 = 16, leftover portion 34.

Canceling products of 27, we get 7 which counted from Aswini gives Punarvasu.
In this manner Dinarsha is Punarvasu.

Bhojana Prasna

Verse 1. In an inquiry bearing on "suppers" the ascendant demonstrates the actual characteristics
of the one who takes dinners. Its solidarity and its affiliation, and so on, decide the man. While
taking dinners he faces that side which is demonstrated by the Dik not entirely settled from the
ruler of the ascendant. The second house oversees the eating plates or leaves utilized for taking
the dinner. Assuming that Saturn possesses the second, the plate has a break; assuming the Sun
or Mars, the plate is pressed or discouraged or the leaf is blurred. The Moon oversees a spotless
plate round in shape. On the off chance that the second is a decent sign, the plate utilized is one
that is for the most part utilized for eating.
NOTES
In this section "Bhojana Prasna" or the subject of inquiries on dinners is taken up. The response
that should be given when an inquiry in regards to suppers, its temperament, the server, and the
people who shared, and so forth, is clarified.
Verse 2. The Bhakshya or the thing utilized as auxiliary dish to rice is represented by the third
house. In the event that the Sun and Venus possess the third, roots, surana and cheerai are
utilized. On the off chance that it is the Sun, the cooked thing is a cycle one, for example,
"Vadai". On the off chance that it is the Moon, it is "sweet laddu" or other cycle ones. On the off
chance that the third house is jeeva and contains Jupiter, bread is utilized. The fourth house
shows the idea of beverages served. On the off chance that it is involved by Saturn or Gulika, the
water tipsy is debased and contains microorganisms.
Refrain 3. As per a few journalists, the fourth house shows the individual who gives the food,
his tendency and disposition, his standing, and so on Of the planets who are in the fourth and
who perspective the fourth, the more grounded one shows the rank. Assuming there are no
planets remaining in or aspecting the fourth, the station is still up in the air by the fourth house.
The fifth house is the 'server' or steward. Assuming Mars involves the fifth, he is of irate nature.
Assuming Saturn or Rahu is in the fifth, the man isn't liberal in giving or serving food.
Refrain 4. Assuming Saturn or Rahu involves the fifth, one is acquainted with take food. If the
fifth is an odd sign, the server is a male; if even, she is a lady. Assuming the fifth house is
aspected by benefics, the individual in question is of good demeanor.

 Verse 5. From the sixth house is to be investigated upadamsa things. The Sun in the fifth
designates 'dishes' that are warm and made of maricha (chillies); the Moon in the fifth shows a
lot of salt in dishes.
Verse 6. Mars in the sixth shows the thing is singed or extremely impactful. In the event that
Mercury is in the sixth, the dish contains things of all taste. Jupiter oversees sweet dishes Venus
demonstrates dishes cooked with mangoes or organic products that fill in creepers.

NOTES
There is another perusing. Rather than 'Skanda', 'Kanda' is seen. All things considered roots are
implied.
Verse 7. Saturn in the sixth oversees 'unpleasant dishes' containing harsh natural products, and
so forth Rahu, Ketu or Gulika in the sixth shows tissue.
Refrain 8. At the point when these planets (Rahu, Ketu or Gulika) involve Pisces, it is fish;
Aries, goat's tissue; Capricorn, tissue of the deer. The fitting non-veggie lover dish ought to be
derived from the idea of the sign in question.
NOTES
In so foreseeing, care should be taken to see whether the people concerned are tissue eaters or
veggie lovers.
Refrain 9. The seventh house administers 'seka dravya' or the hors d'oeuvres. Mars or the Sun in
the seventh demonstrates pepper water; the Moon curds; Mercury buttermilk; Jupiter, milk;
Saturn, rice water or kanji; Venus, it is again buttermilk. Assuming the seventh house is an
amphibian sign involved by Saturn, it is water. As to there are disparate perspectives.
Refrain 10. Assuming the Sun or Mars or Saturn involve the seventh, slick matter is utilized.
Assuming that the Moon, it is rice water. On the off chance that Jupiter, it is ghee; and if Venus,
it is spread.
Verse 11. The nature of the food is to be discovered from the eighth house. Assuming the Sun is
in the eighth, the food is half cooked; if Mars, it is scorched; if Rahu, it has been cooked to such
an extent that it gives a harmful smell with poison in it; if Saturn, it gives an awful taste; and if
Gulika, either vermin or human hair or consumed soot can be found in it. If benefics involve the
8tb, the food is healthy and appropriately cooked.
NOTES
Assuming there are no planets in the eighth, these impacts ought to be gathered from the planets
that perspective the eighth; and in the event that there are no aspecting planets, the outcomes
ought to be perused from the ruler of the eighth.
Verse 12. The ninth house shows the people who take food alongside the chief man 'the
examiner'. The rank of the man, his tone and the number, and so on, can be determined by
thinking about the quantity of planets that possess or perspective the ninth or the Rasmis
demonstrated by the ninth or Rasmis of different planets. Assuming Gulika involves the eighth,

 the man will get dirtied while taking suppers.
Verse 13. The amount of food eaten, or the satiety of the individual must be perused from the
tenth house. Assuming a malefic involves the tenth, the individual isn't happy with the amount
served. In the event that a benefic involves the tenth, he is very happy with the quanity given. On
the off chance that the tenth house is Urdhwa-mukha, his gut is over-burden; assuming it is
Adhomukha, it is deficient; assuming that it is Tiryangmukha, it is filled reasonably.

NOTES
From certain perspectives, on the off chance that the tenth is an ebbing sign, or the Moon is
waxing, the individual indulges. In the event that it is a streaming Rasi or the Moon is on the
melt away, then, at that point, he has taken a lacking amount.
Verse 14. The eleventh house shows the idea of the discussion at the hour of dinners. In the
event that the Sun is in the eleventh, the discussion is about rulers and political issues; assuming
the Moon, it is about ladies; if Mars, about fearless individuals; if Mercury, about scholarly men;
on the off chance that Jupiter or Venus, the discussion is about God and Brahmins; if Saturn,
about hoodlums and hooligans; if Rahu, it is about visha vaidyas (healers of toxic substance);
and if Gulika, people dead.
Refrain 15. Rest after dinners is to be considered from the twelfth house. Benefics in the twelfth
demonstrate sound rest and rest; malefics uncover upset rest. On the off chance that Mars
possesses the twelfth, the individual will rests on a woolen cover; assuming Mercury involves
the twelfth, on the skins of creatures; if the Sun, on mats made of grass; if the Moon, on wooden
logs; and if Jupiter and Venus, delicate pads and beds.

Refrain 16. In the event that the master of the twelfth is magnified, the individual will rest on
great beds and beds. Assuming he is in weakness, he will rests on exposed ground.
Verse 17. These focuses have been summed up beneath as given in another composition. The
first to twelfth houses mean separately the cafe, ceramics or plates to be utilized while taking
food, Bhakshya or auxiliary food; drinks; the demeanor or mind-set of the burger joint;
upadamsa, fluid make a difference to be utilized; the fundamental food; people who take food
alongside the cafe; fulfillment got from food; nature of discussion at the hour of dinners; and rest
and rest after suppers.
Refrain 18. As per Krishneeya, Venus administers sweet food (madhura); the Moon, delicate
and cold things (snigdha); Mercury and Jupiter oversee sharp things (seetha and ruksha); the Sun
saltish and impactful (lavana and kashayd); Saturn, harsh and acidic (katuka); and Mars,
unpleasant things (tikta).
Verse 19. A few essayists are of the assessment that Jupiter oversees sweet things (madhura); the
Sun acidic food sources (teekshna); Saturn severe (tikta) taste; Mercury, impactful (kashaya)
taste; Venus sharp taste; Mars, blistering (katukd) and the Moon, saline taste.
Verse 20. In the event that the rising sign is possessed by a benefic or a benefic involves the

 rising sign, the food is adequate. In the event that the ascendant is an odd sign, the food won't be
delicate. Assuming it is an even sign, it will be delicate and pleasing to the taste.
Verse 21. On the off chance that Mars and the Sun involve a non-watery sign (eighth house), the
food is either exceptionally dry or making unnecessary hotness the body. On the off chance that
they possess an amphibian sign (eighth house), the food is went with bhakshyas. On the off
chance that Saturn and Rahu possess the eighth house, then, at that point, the food eaten is
freezing.
Verse 22. Assuming that the Moon and Venus possess a watery sign, the food is cold and is in a
fluid structure. Assuming Mercury and Jupiter possess a non-amphibian sign, the food is
presented with auxiliary dishes.
Verses 23 and 24. The Sun and Mars oversee the meat of the stag. The Moon oversees the meat
of crab and fishes. Jupiter oversees the meat of elephants and ponies. Saturn oversees the meat of
pigs and she-bison. Venus administers the meat of cows and she-bison. The vegetables
administered by the various signs will be as indicated by their rulers and the idea of the signs.
Refrain 25. Watery planets and watery signs administer watery vegetables. Town signs and
planets demonstrate vegetables filled in country places. Comparably timberland signs and planets
demonstrate backwoods items. Malefics show fluid food as rice water, grain water, and so forth,
cooked with the grains fitting to the planets. Benefics show the food arranged with the grains
represented by them.

Refrain 26. The Moon demonstrates rice water. Assuming he is aspected by Mercury, it is rice
water alongside different curries. Assuming the Moon is aspected by Jupiter, it is rice water
blended in with ghee. On the off chance that there is the part of Venus, it is blended in with
margarine. Different planets demonstrate blend with oil.
Refrain 27. The Sun and Mars demonstrate goat's milk. Venus means cow's milk or items.
Comparably the milk of different creatures relating to signs and planets partner or aspecting them
can be speculated.
Verses 28 and 29. In the event that Mars involves the seventh, the fluid food is ready with
tissue; if Mercury, the fluid food has green tone; if Mercury and Venus, the fluid arranged has
variegated shadings being shaped by various fixings as sambhar; if Saturn, fluid food contains
dead matter of little creatures; in the event that the Sun, the food is ready of 'Kashta Saka'. The
Sun in the seventh shows the passing of the spouse.

Verse 30. Malefics oversee the tissue of flesh eating creatures. Benefics, for example, Venus
oversee the tissue of creatures, that live on grass; Mercury administers the tissue of creatures that
live on tissue and grass. Jupiter oversees the tissue of creatures that live on grass and grains. The
Moon oversees the tissue of creatures that live on fishes and vermins.
NOTES
Watery signs show the tissue of watery creatures. Quadrupedal signs oversee quadrupeds.

 Biped signs oversee the tissue of bipeds, and so forth
Verse 31. The number that co-eat, the time, their rank and their appearance and so forth, all can
be known from the planets. The plates utilized can likewise be determined. The ninth house and
the master of the ninth decide these.

Verses 32, 33 and 34. In deciding the meat dishes, Aries shows goat's tissue; Taurus, the tissue
of cows; Gemini, Leo and Sagittarius, the tissue of fish. Concerning vegetables, Cancer Scorpio
and Capricorn and Pisces oversee the group of crude organic products; Libra, Virgo and
Aquarius administer unadulterated cooked rice. Jupiter rules payasa arranged with ghee; Venus
oversees food with honey, milk and bread.
Verse 35. Proportionately as the Arudha is a move-capable, a typical or a proper sign, the
querent will have taken dinners commonly, two times or just a single time, separately. In the
event that the Arudha being an odd sign is associated with benefics, the individual who took food
was eager at that point. Assuming Arudha being an even sign is associated with malefics, he was
not eager at the hour of dinners. From the signals, words and activities of the examiner, the idea
of food and so on, can be known.
Refrain 36. Assume the examiner wets his lips with his tongue or opens his eyes broadly or
gazes upward or lifts up the center of his hands or giggles altogether, it implies he has had food.
Verse 37. On the off chance that the ascendant turning out to be a benefic sign is involved by
benefic planets the querent had extravagant dinners. If the rising deca-nate is represented by the
meat inclining toward planet, the querist eats meat dishes and food that isn't delicious.
Verse 38. In Bhojana Prasna, the Sun and different planets oversee individually quadrupeds,
little girls, cheats, contentions and counter contentions, riches and pretas. The Sun's association
shows that the feasting place was a cowshed; the Moon's the daugher served dinners; Mars, the
co-eaters were cheats; Mercury, warmed trade of words occurred while eating; Jupiter, the
quereut got food as well as; Venus, food served by spouse; Saturn, it was food associated with
shraddha or demise function.

Verse 39. In the event that Arudha is claimed by benefics; or Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Aquarius or
a Urdwa mukha sign turns out to be the Arudha; and if benefics possess quadrants and thirds; the
rulers of the second and eleventh consolidate or involve their own homes; or trade houses; or
they possess or angle the master of Lagna; or on the other hand if Jupiter and the master of the
ninth are solid and well positioned, then, at that point, the projected business will be effective.

Proshithogamana Prasna
Verse 40. In the event that Arudha is a moveable sign and benefics involve the fourth and eighth,
the individual will get back. In the event that the ruler of the tenth is retrograde and possesses the
ninth, the individual will return. In the event that the ruler of the first is in the sixth, the voyager

 has not arrived at his objective, yet is headed to it.
NOTES
This arrangements with inquiries in regards to the arrival of a his individual house and home and
is far away, banished for good. Whether or not he will return, can be predicted by this prasna.
Verse 41. If the ruler of the ascendant possesses the eleventh, twelfth, first, second, third or then
again if malefics involve quadrants, the voyager won't return. Assuming the Moon involves the
eighth and quadrants are without malefics, the individual will return with practically no incident.
In this yoga, if benefics possess quadrants, the individual will return ahead of schedule with
solace. If the masters of the first and tenth involve the eleventh, twelfth, first, second or third, the
explorer might return without arriving at the objective.
Refrain 42. At the point when the ruler of the ascendant is magnified or is in Moolatrikona; or
one more planet in retrogression possesses the seventh house, the individual who went out will
get back. At the point when the master of the ascendant is retrograde and involves any house,
and Jupiter is in a quadrant, the individual will get back. Every one of the signs demonstrated in
Chapter II of this book may likewise be used in this specific situation.
Verse 43. In the event that the ruler of the ascendant or the planet, who demonstrates the return,
is of slow speed, the voyager will return late; assuming it is of conventional speed, the return will
be in a sensible time; on the off chance that the speed is quick, the return will be early.
Verse 44. On the off chance that the ascendant is solid and the master of the ascendant possesses
a human sign or a human Navamsa-sign, the individual will get back strolling, alongside
numerous people. Assuming that the ascendant ruler is in a quadrupedal sign, the return will be
in vehicles proper to the signs. Assuming that the master of ascendant is in the decanate of bird,
the return will be on horse-back; if the decanate turns out to be watery, the return will be through
watery courses; and assuming the sign is sthala, the return excursion will be through land
courses.
Refrain 45. Assuming the ruler of the ascendant is in Sakata Drekkana, the explorer will return
in a carriage or a chariot. On the off chance that the ruler is in an ethereal sign or Navamsa, the
return will be by a cart (or in style, might be a plane). Assuming the planet demonstrating the
return is feeble, the voyager won't return however there might be reports of his return.
Verse 46. Benefics possessing the ninth demonstrate the nature and great encounters of the
excursion. Malefics uncover the troubles the individual needed to confront. Planets in the eighth
house signify both the great and awful encounters. The seventh house means every one of the
encounters the individual had after his get back.

Suratha Prasna

Verse 1. Assuming the Sun possesses the rising sign or the seventh; or joins with or perspectives
the masters of the first or the seventh, there was no sexual association that day. Assuming these
blends are missing, there was sexual association that day. To the extent that the seventh is related

 with or aspected by benefics or malefics, the association was cheerful or miserable.
Verse 2. On the off chance that the seventh house isn't joined or aspected by the Moon or Venus
however is burdened by malefics, then, at that point, there was sexual association that day.
Krishnacharya is of the assessment that assuming the Moon and Venus join or perspective the
seventh house, co-residence occurred. On the off chance that the Moon and Venus aspected or
joined by the Sun, or benefics perspective the ascendant, then, at that point, the woman had
genuine love or enthusiasm for the spouse at the hour of the association. Assuming that the
Moon and Venus subject to the part of malefics with the exception of the Sun, angle the
ascendant, then, at that point, the lady had no genuine love for the spouse.
Refrain 3. Agreeing as.the ascendant is aspec-ted by benefics or malefics, the lady cherished or
loathed the spouse. Assuming the Moon is joined by malefics, the association was achieved by
sheer power on a reluctant lady. Assuming that the Sun is joined by malefics, the association was
the consequence of the lady's power on a reluctant man.
Verse 4. In the event that the Moon is related with or aspected by the Sun, or is in the vargas of
the Sun, the man has magnificence and training, and so on Assuming the Moon joins or angles
benefics or has the vargas of benefics, the lady has every one of the great characteristics of a
lady.
Refrain 5. In the event that the planet that viewpoints the ascendant possesses its own vargas,
the association occurred in one's own home. Assuming that planet possesses the vargas of
different planets, the association was with one more lady in an unfamiliar spot. On the off chance
that the said planet is magnified, the association was with a lady having a place with a rich
family; assuming he possesses the vargas of companions, the association was with a connected
lady. Assuming the planet is in the vargas of adversaries, the association was with a lady brought
into the world of unfriendly families. In the event that it is crippled, the sexual trade was with a
low-conceived lady. The station of the lady, and so on, is not entirely set in stone from the planet
aspecting Lagna.
NOTES
Assuming the examiner is a lady or the inquiry is about a lady, the planet that angles Lagna
decides the idea of the man - his characteristics, station, and so on
Verse 6. In the event that the Sun, Mars or Venus possesses the seventh, there was sexual
business with another lady. Assuming Jupiter is in the seventh, the association was with the
spouse. If Mercury, a moving young lady. The age of the lady ought to be found out from the age
of the Moon.

NOTES
Assuming that a powerless Moon, the lady is youthful; assuming full Moon, the lady is in the
prime of her childhood. On the off chance that the Moon is old, the lady additionally is old.
Saturn in the seventh implies a lady having a place with another standing (Moudhya Chandra
means a moving young lady).

 Verse 7. Youthful Moon means a lady in her youngsters; Saturn and the Sun an old woman;
Jupiter a lady who has brought forth a kid; Mars, Venus a lady with an unpleasant body. Along
these lines, the age of the man additionally still up in the air.
NOTES
The age of the accomplices with whom one has intercourse can be discovered by the demeanor
of the planets in the seventh house, as described in this refrain.
Verse 8. On the off chance that the Sun involving the vargas of different planets viewpoints the
ascendant, the association is with a regal delight; assuming the Moon correspondingly
positioned, the association is with a Brahmin lady; if Venus, a Sudra lady; if Mars, a priest's
better half; if Jupiter, deceiver (...); Mercury, Saturn or Rahu comparatively arranged, a lady
having a place with different religions. The lady's achievements, her construct, appearance and
character can be perused from the decanate of the ascendant or the planet that involves or
perspectives the ascendant.
NOTES
One might scrutinize the utility of these subtleties. Yet, in instances of supposed assault and
infidelity, signs from the Prasna diagram can be utilized to help the person in question and court
to follow the offender and spot of the demonstration.

Refrain 9. These can be considered from Chathra Rasi too. Assuming Arudha is Chathra or the
master of Arudha possesses Chathra sign, the association was with one's own significant other;
on the off chance that the agreeable indication of the ruler of Arudha turns out to be Chathra, or a
cordial planet involves Chathra, the association was with a lady of an amicable or related family;
also an antagonistic indication of the ruler of Arudha turns out to be Chathra or an adversary
involves Chathra the association was with a lady having a place with a hostile family. Here
companions and adversaries are not set in stone according to refrain "jeevo jeeva budho
sitendatanayo".
NOTES
The creator needs the thought of the planetary fellowships and hostilities as given by
Varahamihira in his Brihat Jataka. Mihira appears to acknowledge the perspectives on Yavanacharya as indicated by whom there are just companions and enemies however not neutrals.
The second piece of the refrain explains the perspectives on Satya-charya. From the
Moolatrikona of a planet, the rulers of the second, the fourth, the eighth, the twelfth, the fifth, the
ninth and the master of his worship sign are companions of the planet concerned. The rest are
adversaries.
English interpretation of Brihat Jataka, "Bhattotpala notices appropriately that as per
Yavaneswara there are just companions and enemies however not neutrals or associates. As per
Satyacharya, whom the creator of Brihat Jataka holds in incredible esteem and regard, every one
of the different shades of fellowship and hostility are obviously discernible. The analyst here
gives extended clarifications so as to improve on issues. I might statement here a couple of cases

 with the goal that the rest may handily be gotten a handle on. The Sun has his Moolatrikona in
Leo. The twelfth from Leo is Cancer. Its master is the Moon and as he possesses just one house
he turns into the dearest companion of the Sun. The fourth from Leo is Scorpio, and ninth is
Aries; their ruler is Mars. The Sun is commended in Aries. Subsequently Mars is a companion of
the Sun. The fifth and eighth from Leo are Sagittarius and Pisces. Their ruler is Jupiter.
Subsequently Jupiter is a cozy companion of the Sun. The second and eleventh from Leo are
Virgo and Gemini. Their ruler is Mercury. The second Rasi is referenced however the eleventh
isn't named, along these lines Mercury is a nonpartisan of the Sun. The sixth and seventh from
Leo are Capricorn and Aquarius, and as both of those houses are not referenced in the standard,
their master Saturn is an unpleasant adversary of the Sun. The third and tenth from Leo are Libra
and Taurus. Their ruler is Venus. Both of these houses are not referenced in the Sutra, and thusly
Venus is a severe adversary of the Sun. Take currently Moon. His Moolatrikona is in Taurus.
The fourth is Leo, its master is the Sun, and accordingly he is a companion of the Moon. The
second and fifth houses from Taurus are Gemini and Virgo. Mercury is their ruler. Hence he is a
companion of the Moon, The seventh and twelfth from Taurus are Scorpio and Aries. Their ruler
is Mars, seventh house isn't referenced yet the twelfth is named. Mars hence is an unbiased of the
Moon. The eighth and eleventh from Taurus are Sagittarius and Pisces. Their ruler is Jupiter, as
the eleventh isn't referenced yet the eighth is named and consequently Jupiter becomes impartial
to the Moon. Moon is magnified in Taurus. The sixth from it is Libra, its ruler is Venus. The
sixth isn't referenced and along these lines Venus turns into an impartial of the Moon. The ninth
and tenth houses from Taurus are Capricorn and Aquarius. Their ruler is Saturn. tenth isn't
named and in this manner Saturn turns into a nonpartisan of the Moon. For Mars, Aries is
Moolatrikona. The fourth from it is Cancer, with the Moon as its ruler. He claims just one house
and hence the Moon is the companion of Mars. The fifth from Aries is Leo. Its master is the Sun,
he possesses just one house and as it is named the Sun turns into the companion of Mars.
Likewise discover for every one of the planets from their Moolatri-konas. There are planets who
own two houses while the Sun and the Moon own just one house each. On the off chance that the
planet claims two houses named in the Sutra (text), he turns into a companion. On the off chance
that he possesses two houses however one of them falls in the numbers named above and
different doesn't, then, at that point, the planet turns into an impartial. Be that as it may, assuming
a planet possesses two houses and not a solitary one of them is named in the Sutra, then, at that
point, he turns into an adversary.
Refrain 10. Assuming that the ascendant turns out to be an odd sign or the planet aspecting the
ascendant ends up involving an odd sign, then, at that point, the sexual demonstration was done
once. If the abovementioned turns out to be even, then, at that point, the demonstration was led
twice. Assuming that the vargas of the ascendant are claimed by Mars and Venus only, then, at
that point, the sex-act was directed according to standards of Vatsyayana, commonly.
Proportionately as the varga of the ascendant is that of the Sun or the Moon, co-residence
occurred during day or evening. The spot of sexual demonstration is to be determined from the
ascendant.
Refrain 11. Assuming the Moon and Mars possess the first, fifth, seventh or ninth, the couple
squabbled and kept alert. Assuming the Moon and Saturn are in the above houses, they imagined
that they had sexual trade. In the event that the Sun and the Moon are in the above houses, there
was no pleasure except for he was permitted to feel the private organs; assuming the Moon and

 Venus, the couple figured out how to talk private matters and participate in private
entertainments.
Verse 12. In the event that the Moon and Jupiter are in the first, the 5tb, the seventh or the ninth,
be had association with a cultivated lady and there is the possibility of pregnancy. Assuming the
Moon and Mercury, the association was not with his significant other but rather with another
lady; on the off chance that Mars is in the ascendant and Saturn is in the seventh or the other way
around, there was no rest for the couple due to fear from fire. A similar impact can be told
assuming these masters exchange houses.

Verse 13. In the yoga depicted above, in the event that the Moon involves the sign joined by
Mars or Saturn the couple continued quarreling. On the off chance that the Moon is in the
seventh, the fight was because of the lady and assuming the Moon is in the ascendant, the
question was because of the man. In the event that Venus is related with Mars, or Saturn involves
the ascendant or the seventh, the couple isolated quarreling and went through the night in various
beds. On the off chance that Mars is in the third and the Moon is in the seventh, there was
squabble and detachment and the couple needed to rest on the uncovered ground.
Refrains 14 and 15. Assuming that the Moon and Venus involve the first, the third, the fourth or
the 7tb, the couple squabbled and the dress of the lady was cut off. The house in which the
association occurred is to be learned along these lines: If Saturn involves the first or the seventh,
the house is a fixed one; if Mars, a consumed house; if Mercury, a house developed by many
woodworkers; if the Moon, a recently constructed house; assuming the Sun, a house made of
much wood yet not solid; if Venus, a new and fancy house; and if Jupiter, an exceptionally solid
house.
NOTES
This data can be utilized in different sorts of inquiries like conveyance, robbery, and so forth
Verse 16. There is another view. Assuming the Sun is in a watery sign, the association occurred
in the shower house; the Sun in different signs, demonstrates kitchen. Mars administers the
kitchen, Mercury rules jungle gyms, Saturn oversees a Sudra house or a cowshed. Rahu
administers the place of low-conceived individuals or lavatories. The Moon administers castles
or sanctuaries. A feeble Venus administers an old house.
NOTES
Here the planetary position is regarding the ascendant or the seventh house.
Verse 17. There is as yet another view. On the off chance that the ascendant isn't aspected by any
planet, then, at that point, the house where co-home occurred is still up in the air from the idea of
the ascendant. Thus it is given in the following stanza.
Verse 18. On the off chance that Aries or Libra turns out to be the ascendant, the houses
administered by Mars or Venus in the above are to be thought of. On the off chance that the
ascendant is Taurus or a typical sign, the house administered by Mercury will be the delight
place. Leo leads the cowshed. Scorpio administers the house relegated for the Moon. Disease

 oversees the houses relegated for Jupiter. Capricorn a round-molded house. Also Aquarius runs
where snakes are loved.

As per another view, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces and Gemini rising demonstrate a grannery, the
factory house where rice and different grains are powdered, the kitchen and the cowshed
individually.
Refrain 19. Assuming that the Moon possesses the signs or Navamsa indications of Saturn, or is
aspected by or related with Saturn or involves the fourth house, or is placed in a watery sign, the
couple had intercourse connection in a dim spot. If anyway the Sun viewpoints or partners with
the Moon, the spot was not dim.
Refrain 20. Certain Lakshanas or demonstrative signs are perused from the deepa (lit light)
continued during daytime for karma, at the hour of dinners or some other promising event and
during evening time for light and general success.

Refrain 21. Partition the pleasure room into 12 signs and discover where the Sun stands. Toward
the path meant by the sign a light is continued to consume, or toward the path suggested by the
sign where the Sun stands - as in Aries and its thirds - east; Taurus and its thirds - south: Gemini
and its thirds - west; and Cancer and its thirds - north. In the event that the ascendant is solid, the
heading is to be determined accordingly: Aries and Taurus - east: Gemini - south-east; Cancer
and Leo - south; Virgo - south-west, and so forth
Refrain 22, Count 3 ghatikas, 45 vighatikas before dawn and accept that Aries keeps going till 1
gh. 15 vig. after dawn. Then, at that point, the following five ghatikas is Taurus, then, at that
point, Gemini 5 ghatikas, and in a specific order, signs come in progression. Note the sign
involved by the Sun; the bearing demonstrated by this sign is the one where the light is kept lit.
Assuming the Sun possesses a proper sign, the light is fixed to the divider or to the ground;
assuming that it is a moveable sign, the light is a lamp that can be moved from one spot to
another; and assuming it is in a not unexpected sign, it is a hanging lamp.

Refrain 23. If at the hour of Prasna, the Sun is solid, the fire of the light is clear and splendid.
Assuming it is powerless, the fire is weak. Likewise if at the hour of the question, the Moon is
solid, the oil utilized is clear and unadulterated and on the off chance that he is powerless, the oil
is sullied and blended.
Verses 24 and 25. In the event that the Moon possesses the Moon's Hora, the oil utilized for the
light is ghee. Assuming the Moon is in the Sun's Hora, cocoanut or gingelly oil is utilized.
Assuming the Moon is in the initial segment of the sign or Navamsa, then, at that point, there is
an enormous amount of oil; and assuming it is in the last piece of the Rasi or Amsa, the oil is
going to end. The idea of the wick is to be perused from the ascendant.
The idea of the wick is signified by the planets possessing the ascendant. On the off chance that
there are no planets, the individual rulers uncover the idea of the wick in the light. The shade of

 the wick is to be known from the shade of the sign or Navamsa sign, whichever is more
grounded. In the event that both sign and Navamsa are solid, the wick has both the tones.
Assuming the ascendant is a typical sign, there are two wicks; on the off chance that it turns out
to be in the previous piece of the sign, the wick is long and just a little part of it is scorched.
NOTES
Subtleties relating to the shade of the wick, the heading where the light is kept, the idea of the
fire, and so on, can't be very applicable to present day times. What should intrigue a peruser is
the profundity of detail even as to such matters, the old celestial authors had gone into via
outlining incalculable planetary mixes.
Where the sexual association occurred, which standing the man or lady has a place with,
regardless of whether it was by common assent or forcibly can be applicable even today in
handling instances of assault. It is for the perusers to consider over the subtleties and decide for
themselves their utility.

Nashta Prasna

Verse 1. Assume an individual makes a question without referencing what it precisely is, it is
named as Nashta Prasna. The most effective method to address such inquiries has been managed
by the extraordinary scholars Krishna Acharya and Madhava Acharya.
Verses 2 and 3. Whenever the examiner without uncovering the business fundamental the
inquiry places in an unclear inquiry, "I wish to know the consequence of something to me.
Would you be able to let me know the business and the outcome?" The response should be given
remembering the accompanying: If Jupiter or the Moon involves Lagna or Arudha, it is Ayur
Prasna (managing about disorder and life span). Assuming Saturn involves the seventh, the 8t'u
or the twelfth, consider that it is a Chora Prasna (managing the deficiency of abundance through
burglary). Assuming Jupiter is in the second, Venus in the first or the fourth, Mercury in the
tenth, then, at that point, it is about some business (Karya Prasna).
NOTES
In every one of these, Nimittas likewise ought to be painstakingly investigated.
Refrain 4. Assume a planet involves the first, the fourth, the sixth, the seventh, the tenth from
Lagna or Arudha or the Moon. It has its Navamsa in Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces, then, at that
point, say that it is a Chora Prasna (some abundance has been taken away by some hoodlum).
Also if a malefic involves the tenth house from any of these, say that it is a Chora Prasna.
NOTES
Here the planets involving the first, the fourth, the sixth, the seventh, the tenth and the malefic in
the tenth, are in fact known as Chora planets. Assuming you track down a larger number of
planets than one, gauge the strength and pick the most grounded.
Verse 5. With respect to, the creator of the popular composition Shat Panchasika has semething

 to say:
(a) From the Navamsa of Lagna, decide the idea of the thing taken; (b) the state of the cheat can
be known from the Drekkana of Lagna; (c) from the Lagna Rasi, decide the time, where the
taken thing is kept and heading where it is; and
(d)

the station and age of the hoodlum from the master of Lagna.

Refrain 6. The size and state of the criminal will be like Lagna Drekkana, and the ruler of Lagna
will show his assemble, shading, dress and vesha (appearance). Here likewise the most grounded
ought to be thought about.
Verse 7. In Arya Saptati, it is expressed that the appearance and rank of the hoodlum will be by
and large like that of the master of the ascendant.

Refrain 8. As per Madhava, the sixth house is to be considered to distinguish the criminal. The
planet that involves the sixth house or the master of the sixth uncovers the rank, name and
presence of the criminal.
Refrain 9. In the event that the planet included involves his own sign or Navamsa, the
abundance has not been taken, it is still there. In the event that the planet involves the sign or
Navamsa of an enemy, the abundance is in the place of his adversaries; likewise assuming a
planet possesses a cordial sign or Navamsa, the taken abundance is in the ownership of
companions or relations. In the event that the planet is commended or in magnified Navamsa, it
is in the possession of a rich man; assuming it is incapacitated or in crippled Navamsa, it is in the
possession of a low-conceived man. The subtleties can be perused from Arudha and Navamsa
Lagna.
NOTES
Of the three viz., the ruler of the ascendant, the master of the Navamsa Lagna and the ruler of the
Bhava concerned, the latter is the most remarkable in granting the outcomes.
Refrain 10. The taken property is toward the path connoted by Arudha. Assuming there is a
planet in Arudha, that can be thought about. The course is to be determined based on the stanza
in Brihat Jataka "pragadeesaha''. Assuming Arudha is a moveable sign, property lies distant; in
the event that it is a decent sign, it is close and in the event that it is a not unexpected sign, the
property is neither far away nor close by.
Refrain 11. Assuming the ascendant is solid, the taken abundance is toward the path connoted
by it. On the off chance that it isn't solid, the heading is to be learned from the planet aspecting
the ascendant. To the extent that the ascendant is a moveable, a fixed or a typical sign, the
abundance is passing from one hand to another, is in a proper spot, or is in an adjoining house or
town.
Verse 12. In the event that the ascendant or Navamsa is a decent sign or the ascendant is
vargottama, then, at that point, the criminal is one among the family. In any case the criminal is
an untouchable. Assuming the ascendant or the Navamsa is a typical sign without being
vargottama, the cheat hails from the area.

 Refrain 13. To the extent that Arudha is a diurnal or nighttime sign the burglary occurred with
no attempt whatsoever at being subtle or in the evening.
Refrain 14. Assuming Arudha is Aries, the taken abundance is in glades and field grounds or
where goats meander; if Taurus, where bulls meander about or really like to reside; if Gemini, a
single spot, resting room or a private parlor; if Cancer, where crabs live or in hole; if Leo,
timberlands, caves and bumpy lots; if Virgo, where vegetables, trees and plants fill en masse, and
watery spots; if Libra, commercial centers, open markets, and so forth
Verse 15. In the event that the Arudha is Scorpio, the taken property will be in caves,
entombment grounds or hollows; if Sagittarius, the fight ground and lord's home; on the off
chance that Capricorn timberlands, banks of streams, places possessed by native clans; if
Aquarius, the kitchen, potter's home, and so forth; and if Pisces, sacred sanctuaries and
Brahmin's homes.

Planetary Indications of Theft
Refrain 16. Assuming that Jupiter angles or joins the ascendant, the taken article will be in
cowsheds, home of preceptors, sanctuaries, places of modest ladies. Venus demonstrates the
resting room, gardens, water tanks, places of wonderful ladies; where laurels, blossoms,
treatment are remained careful. Mars oversees kitchen and places of craftsmen. The Sun implies
places of quarreling ladies, places of excellent ladies in the prime of their childhood, watery
spots. Partition the Rasi where Jupiter remains into 4 pieces of 7 1/2 degrees each. In the event
that the planet possesses the initial segment, say, it is a cowshed; the second part, home of
preceptors; the third part, sanctuaries and the fourth part, places of modest ladies.
Refrain 17. The Moon indicates the place of the moving young lady, watery spots,
neighborhood of lakes or oceans. Mercury administers places of youthful and young ladies,
places of resilient ladies, places of wonderful maidens. Saturn administers places of old women,
where split vessels are discarded, where vessels in which tissue is cooked, washed or kept;
sloppy and vaporous and damp spots. The specific spot can be distinguished by isolating the
Lagna according to the technique proposed in Krishneeya.
NOTES
The spot a taken article is stored in can be learned by noticing the planet possessing the Arudha
Lagna. For example as per refrain 16, in the event that Jupiter is in Arudha, the spots will be (a)
cowsheds or (b) homes of preceptors or sanctuaries or places of virtuous ladies. Which is the
specific region ? For discovering this, partition the Arudha sign into 4 sections and find in what
part Jupiter is found. Assume Jupiter is in Scorpio 13°. This will be the second part which
implies the place of a preceptor. Take the Sun once more; assuming he is in Arudha, the article
of robbery will have been kept in (a) places of quarreling ladies, (b) or places of excellent and
young ladies or (c) watery spots. For this situation the ascendant is to be partitioned into 3
sections. In the event that the Sun is, say 25°, and that implies the third part, the article will be
tracked down put in some watery spot.

 Refrain 18. The quantity of taken articles is not set in stone as follows: If it is Aries 7, Taurus 5,
Gemini 12, Cancer 6, Leo 8, Virgo 6, Libra 7, Scorpio 7, Sagittarius 13, Capricorn 10, Aquarius
6, and Pisces 15. The sign that has uncovered the taken articles is to be investigated and the
number as given in the refrain ought to be learned. The shade of Arudha sign uncovers the shade
of the taken thing. As to, there is a distinction of assessment.

NOTES
The useful use of this technique is to some degree vague. For instance: assuming that the sign
implying the robbery of the articles is Aries, the number is 7. It is conceivable that I might not
have perceived the importance of the refrain accurately.
Refrain 19. From Aries to Leo - the shading must be taken by the stanza in Brihat Jataka* rakta,
sweta, suka tanu nibhah. Virgo administers variegated tones, Libra - white tone, Scorpio and
Aquarius - dark or dim shading, Sagittarius - brilliant shading, Capricorn - pinjala shading and
Pisces - sky-blue.
NOTES
As indicated by the verse alluded to in refrain 19, the shades of the 12 signs are individually:
Aries red, Taurus - white, Gemini - green, Cancer - pink, Leo - pale white, Virgo - pie bare,
Libra - dark, Scorpio - brilliant; Sagittarius - yellowish; Capricorn - variegated; Aquarius profound brown; and Pisces - white.
Verse 20. The rasmis or beams contributed by the various planets are separately: the Sun 30, the
Moon 28, Mars 8, Mercury 6, Jupiter 9, Venus 7, Saturn 3, and Rahu and Ketu 2 each. The
rasmis of the planets joining or aspecting the ascendant show the quantity of articles lost in
robbery.

NOTES
On the off chance that Arudha is more grounded than the Ascendant, the rasmis of the planets
joining the previous ought to be thought of. Any place the word Lagna is utilized, it naturally
infers the most grounded of the Arudha and Lagna.
Verse 21. On the off chance that the Sun, Mars or Mercury angle the Moon, the taken abundance
is covered underground; assuming Jupiter viewpoints the Moon, the taken abundance is kept
suspended in some raised spot; if Venus, it is concealed submerged; if Saturn, it is kept open
presented to the breezes. On the off chance that the Moon isn't aspected or related by any planet,
then, at that point, the lost article will be, based on Arudha sign, kept in a vessel made of Dhalu,
Moola or Jeeva as demonstrated by the Arudha sign.
NOTES
On the off chance that Arudha is urdhwamukha, it is up high; assuming it is adhomukha, it is low
in the ground. The idea of the riches and when it was taken, can be given from the planet that
angles Arudha.

 Refrain 22. Aries and its quadrants, Taurus and its quadrants, Gemini and its quadrants address
individually Dhatu and Karma, Moola and Bhoga and Jeeva and Nasa. Navamsa Rasis
additionally connote Dhatu and Moola as above.
Refrain 23. Heavenly bodies from Aswini and onwards address in gatherings of three
individually Dhatu and Karma, Moola and Bhoga and Jeeva and Nasa. Of the planets, the Moon,
Mars, Saturn and Rahu mean Dhatu; the Sun and Venus, Moola; and Mercury and Jupiter, Jeeva.
NOTES
Zodiacal signs and heavenly bodies are said to address Dhatu, Moola, and so on as follows:
Sign or Navamsa Sign

Signification

Aries Dhatu and Karma
Taurus

Moola and Bhoga

Gemini

Jeeva and Nasa

Cancer

Dhatu and Karma

Leo Moola and Bhoga
Virgo Jeeva and Nasa
Libra Dhatu and Karma
Scorpio

Moola and Bhoga

Sagittarius Jeeva and Nasa
Capricorn

Dhatu and Karma

Aquarius

Moola and Bboga

PiscesJeeva and Nasa

The groups of stars additionally connote:
Aswini Bharani Krittika Rohini Mrigasira Aridra Punarvasu Pushyami Aslesha Makha Pubba
Uttara Hasta China Swati Visakha Anuradha Jyeshta Moola Poorvashadha Uttarashadha

Dhatu and Karma Moola and Bhoga Jeeva and Nasa Dhatu and Karma Moola and Bhoga Jeeva
and Nasa Dhatu and Karma

Sravana Dhanishta Satabhisha Poorvabhadra Uttarabhadra Revati

Moola and Bhoga Jeeva and Nasa

 Verse 24. Again a sign itself can be partitioned into three sections, viz., Karma, Bhoga and Nasa.
The main Drekkana is Karma; the second, Bhoga and the third is Nasa. Consequently the initial
segment of Aries is Karma Dhatu, the second part Bhoga Dhatu and the third part Nasa Dhatu.
The initial segment of Taurus is Karma Moola, second part is Bhoga Moola, third part is Nasa
Moola. The initial segment of Gemini is Karma Jeeva, second part Bhoga Jeeva, third part Nasa
Jeeva. Concerning different signs we need to continue thusly. This is the perspective on the
learned ia the science.
Verse 25. With respect to odd Navamsa, Chara Rasi amsas are Dhatu, Sthira Rasi amsas are
Moola and Ubhaya Rasi amsas are Jeeva. With respect to even Navamsas, the opposite holds
great, viz., Chara - Jeeva, Sthira - Moola and Ubhaya - Nasa Dhatus.
NOTES
This refrain manages the rulership of Dhatu, Moola and Jeeva, concerning Navamsa signs. An
odd Navamsa might turn out to be chara or moveable (model Aries Navamsa Rasi) or normal
(for example Gemini Navamsa Rasi). An even Navamsa can be sthira (e g. Taurus) or Chara (for
example Disease). Consequently as per this verse when the Navamsa is odd, Chara Rasi amsas
connote Dhatu, Sthira Rasi amsas Moola and Ubhaya Rasi amsas Jeeva.

Navamsa Rasi

Its Nature Indication

Aries - odd Chara - moveable Dhatu
Taurus - even

Sthira - fixed

Moola

Gemini - oddUbhaya - common Jeeva
Malignant growth - even Chara - moveable Jeeva
Leo - odd

Sthira - fixed

Moola

Virgo - even Ubhaya - common Dhatu
Libra - odd Chara - moveable Dhatu
Scorpio - even

Sthira - fixed

Moola

Sagittarius - odd Ubhaya - common Jeeva
Capricorn - even Chara - moveable Jeeva
Aquarius - odd

Sthira - fixed

Moola

Pisces - evenUbhaya - common Dhatu

Verse 26. On the off chance that Arudha Lagna, Navamsa, the planet that involves Arudha and
the Arudha Nakshatra, end up being Dhatu, then, at that point, the taken abundance is iron, stone,

 copper, earth, bronze, gold, silver, lead - minerals accordingly. In the event that in the Dhatu
Rasi, the Navamsa, the asterism and the conjoined planet mean Moola, the taken article is made
of roots or fortune. On the off chance that in the Dbatu Rasi, the Navamsa, the asterism and the
joining planet are Jeeva, then, at that point, pictures and symbols made of metals are the taken
articles.
Refrain 27. Assuming every one of the variables included mean the Moola, it demonstrates
vegetables, fledglings and organic products. Assuming the Rasi implies Moola and the other
elements imply Dhatu, it is jaggery, dry fuel, garments and every consumed thing. On the off
chance that the Rasi is Moola and different elements are Jeeva, pictures made of wood and
creatures living in the openings of trees, parrots, homes, cowshed, and so forth, are shown.
Verse 28. Assuming that the sign and different elements are Jeeva it demonstrates elephants and
different creatures, tutors who deal with kids, pregnant ladies, shepherds, and so on Assuming
that the Rasi is jeeva and the leftover variables are Dbatu, things demonstrated aie half-consumed
things, bodies and bones. Assuming that the Rasi is Jeeva and the others connote Moola, the
things demonstrated are paws of tigers, skins, hair of creatures, tusk of an elephant, horns and
woolen covers.
Verse 29. Aries oversees Dhatus, as gold, coins (pana), silver, copper, lead lights and vessels and
iron.
Refrain 30. Taurus administers Moola, for example, garments, pants, caps, hard dress, shoe,
everything made of cotton, beds, pads, and so on
Refrain 31. Gemini has administration over Jeeva like snakes and bears, wild flies and honey
bees, rodents, wild felines, and so on, and so forth Disease administers Dhatus as pick hatchet,
swords and different weapons. Capricorn is additionally like Cancer.
Verse 32. Leo oversees Moola - roots, rice plants, chunna, betel leaf, blackgram, littlegram,
plantains, jack foods grown from the ground. Virgo oversees Jeeva - as all tissue utilized by
ladies while eating. Libra rules Dhatu - as spread milk, milk, curd, skins, covers.
Verse 33. Scorpio oversees Moola - as group of leafy foods, harmful planets, pepper, alcohol
and opium, and so on The principal half of Sagittarius demonstrates human vargas and the
second half elephants, ponies, snakes and cocks. Aquarius is like Leo. What's more Pisces has
that multitude of things given for Gemini other than snakes and fishes. The lost articles should be
learned based on Arudha and Navamsa.
Refrain 34. Everything signs can be separated into four sections, Dhatu, Moola, Jeeva and
Mrita.
Refrain 35. The primary Drekkana of each sign is Dhatu, the second is Moola and the third is
Jeeva. This is the perspective on Madhavacharya.
NOTES
As per another understanding, the first, the second and the third pieces of a sign connotes
Dhatum, Moola and Jeeva. The first word utilized in thryamsa, and that implies 33%. Mi. K. K.
Kurup, a notable stargazer of Kerala, disclosed to me as soon as 1968 that thryamsa could be

 considered as a Drekkana i.e., 33% of a sign.
Verse 36. On the off chance that a planet is put in the Dhatu part of a Nara Rasi, bangles, chains,
swotds, little chimes and such things helpful to men are implied. Planets involving the Dbatu
segment in a watery sign signify water pots and cooking tools.
NOTES
As per section 34, each Rasi has been isolated into four sections, demonstrating individually
Dhatu, Moola, Jeeva and Mrityu. Nara Rasis or human signs are Gemini, Virgo, Libra, first 50%
of Sagittarius and Aquarius. If in a Nara Rasi, Arudha falls in the initial segment, the articles
connoted are bangles, chains, blades, and so forth Malignant growth is a watery sign. In the event
that the Arudha is in the first (of the four sections) it demonstrates water pots, cooking tools, and
so on
Verse 37. The cheat's appearance will relate to the rising Drekkana on the off chance that the
ascendant is solid. In the event that it is feeble, it will relate to the state of the planet involving
the seventh; or the most grounded of the planets arranged in quadrants portray the presence of
the cheat. On the off chance that there are numerous planets there will be many cheats and the
idea of the hoodlums ought to be determined from the planet in retrogression.
Verse 38. Proportionately as the planet implying the criminal is in the first, second, third, fourth
or fifth house the burglary will have been perpetrated by the querist, a relative, a sibling, mother
and uncles and kids individually. Also in the event that the planet meaning the criminal is in its
own vargas, the examiner will be the cheat; in the vargas of the second master, relatives; in those
of the third ruler, siblings; of the fourth master, mother; of the fifth master, kids, and so forth
Assuming such a planet is in the sixth or eighth, the cheat will be an adversary.
Verse 39. The home of Jupiter and Mercury is in towns; the Moon and Venus in watery spots;
the Sun, Mars and Saturn in timberland districts; Virgo, Libra and Sagittarius in urban areas;
Gemini, Aquarius, Aries and Taurus in towns; Leo and Capricorn (first half) in backwoods;
Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces and the last option part of Capricorn in water. The origination of the
criminal will be as per the home of the planet controlling the hoodlum.
Verse 40. Analyze the home of Chora Graha and settle the origin of the criminal. The home of
the cheat ought to be discovered from the sign involved by the chora planet. Assuming the home
and home of the planet end up being something very similar, then, at that point, he is Jiving in
the spot of his introduction to the world.
Refrain 41. The Moon can be considered as continuing from a town to a woods, Venus from a
woodland to a town, Venus goes in a shallow watery surface, the Moon goes in a profound well.;
Rahu moves in a snake opening, hollows or pits; Saturn meanders in a cemetery and thick
backwoods; the Sun in mountains and Mars among creepers in mountains.
NOTES
The implications given in this refrain can empower one to foresee the whereabouts of the
hoodlum. In the event that the planet included is the Moon, the cheat will continue from a town
to a woods. These standards are to be adjusted to squeeze into current circumstances.

 Verses 42 and 43. The principal Drekkana specifies 'standing', the second Drekkana designates
'resting' and the third specifies 'sitting'. Cheats additionally can be viewed as in this stage.
'Human Drekkanas' mean the most recognized among the criminals. Monkey-face, horse-face,
canine's face, pig's face, snake - these Drekkanas show extremely terrible people among cheats.
Verses 44 and 45. The state of the cheat, his dress and weapons are all not entirely set in stone
from the idea of the 36 Drekkanas. What they are, has been point by point in Brihat Jataka. The
primary expression of each refrain in that part has been given in these two verses for simple
reference and recognition.
Verse 46. All vowels are represented by the Sun; the Moon rules ya ra la va; Mars - kavarga;
Venus - chavarga; Mercury - tavarga; Jupiter - thavarga; Saturn - pavarga; and Rahu the leftover
letters. The signs additionally oversee the in sequential order letters (as given in the notes). From
this the name of the hoodlum still up in the air.

NOTES
Every one of the 16 vowels are administered by the Sun. Different planets and signs mean the
different letters as follows: ya (*) ra (*), la (*), va (*) - the Moon; ka (*), kha (*), ga (*), gha (*),
jna (*) - Mars; cha (*)) chha (*), ja (*), jha (*) - gna (sr) - Venus; ta (*), tha (*), da (*), dha
(*), na (*), - Mercury: tha (*), thha (*), da (*)t dhha (*), na (*) - Jupiter; dad (*), pha (*), ba
(*), bha (*), mama (*) - Saturn: ssa (*), sha (*), sa (*), ha(*)t la (*), ksha (*) - Rahu Signs
administer the letters as follows: Aries - a (*), aa (*), e (*), ee (*), ssa (*)
Taurus - u (*), oo (*), ru(*) sha (*) Gemini - roo (*), sa (*)
Disease - ye (*), eye (*), ha (*)
Leo - o (*), ou(*), la (*)
Virgo - am (*), aha (*), ksha (*) Libra - ka (*)
Scorpio - cha (*) Sagittarius - tha (*) Capricorn - ta (*)

Aquarius - dad (*)
Pisces-ya (*), ra (*), la (*), va (*).
Refrain 47. Arudha, the master of Arudha, the sign involved by the ruler and the Navamsa of the
master of Arudha, ought to be thought of. The letter showed by the most grounded will be the
primary letter of the hoodlum. The place of the hoodlum is the sign involved by the master of the
sixth. The master that perspectives or joins the sixth, the ruler of the sixth, the Navamsa
indication of the ruler of the sixth, the sixth house Rasi - the letters of these (the most grounded
and having more meanings) might be taken as the underlying letter for the sake of the hoodlum.

 NOTES
Assume an individual keeping something inside the center of the hand says "What is there inside
this?", or he places in inquiries "What is the name of the cheat?", "What did I lose?, what is the
matter in my brain ?" and so on This refrain empowers us to answer such inquiries. We ought to
be directed by the first letter in quite a while questions. In the event that Lagna is aspected by a
planet, the main letter of the word in the inquiry will be the one shown by the planet; on the off
chance that it isn't aspected, then, at that point, the letter demonstrated by the planet possessing
Lagna; and assuming there is more than one planet, consistently take the most grounded.
Refrain 48. In the past stanza, by Amsa, we need to take Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and Trimsamsa,
the rulers of these to be noted and their letters to be analyzed. In the event that a planet possesses
its own varga, the letter to be noted is the one claimed by the planet. In the event that he
possesses another varga, the joined letter shaped by adding his letter to the letter of the master of
the varga. In the event that the planet possesses a decent sign, the name contains 4 letters; a
moveable sign signifies 2 letters. A typical sign indicates 3 letters and furthermore incorporates
'last names'.
Refrain 49. Compute the longitude of Gulika. The remainder got by partitioning the unexpired
vighatikas in the Navamsa of Gulika by 100 shows the planet. Assuming that it is one, it is the
Sun; if two, the Moon, etc. The group of stars administered by the planet so got shows the
primary letter for the sake of the criminal.
The remainder, acquired by separating the unexpired part of Gulika Navamsa by 75, offers the
terminated hints - the letter showed by the following sign is the primary letter for the sake of the
hoodlum.
Refrain 50. For the hour of inquiry, the longitudes of the Moon and Gulika are to be determined
and the more grounded of the two ought to be treated as Arudha. From it, the idea of the
abundance lost as Dhatu, Moola, Jeeva, and so on, ought to be determined. The sign involved by
the masters of the second from Arudha shows where the taken abundance is concealed by the
proclamation "Matsau ghatee nrumithunam"'.

NOTES
At the hour of inquiry the sign involved by the Moon or Gulika, whichever is more grounded,
ought to be treated as Arudha and the idea of the article - Dhatu, Moola or Jeeva, determined
based on the Arudha so showed up at. The idea of the spot where the taken article is kept ought
to be determined from the idea of the sign the second ruler involves. The idea of the sign ought
to be considered according to the refrain *matsau ghatee nrumithunam given in Brihat Jataka.
The interpretation of this refrain alongside notes by late Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao are given
underneath: "Meena is addressed by two fishes lying near one another with their heads pointing in inverse
bearings; Kumbha is shown by an individual bearing a water pot; Mithuna is demonstrated by a
man with a club and a lady with a lute, in close hug; Dhanus is depicted as a Centaur with the
rear part looking like that of a pony and the front of a toxophilite; Makara bears the portrayal of

 the substance of a deer with the thwart part of a crocodile; Tbula addresses the presence of a man
with an equilibrium close by; Kanya is shown by a virgin situated in a boat with a yield in one
hand with a light in the other, and different signs are addressed by their names and move in
places friendly to their temperament."
"Pisces is shaped of one fish with its tail against the top of the other as well as the other way
around. The sign will be later on called Ubhayodaya or that which can rise regardless, for we see
a head and a tail on each side of the figure. Kumbha in Sanskrit implies a pot and Makara implies
a crocodile. Thula implies equilibrium and Kanya implies a virgin. Dhanus implies a bow and
the rest are straightforward. The spots generally amiable to their temperaments will be
constrained by them and they additionally have an incredible similarity for such locales and the
results of those areas. Watery surfaces are loved by fish and crab, customary wildernesses and
lush fields are for slam and bull. Profound woodlands and caverns are for lion. Roads in the
urban communities are for balances. Towns are for people or the couple. Military grounds are for
toxophilite.
"Crocodiles are attached to watery spots. Scorpions are enamored with underground cleft and
openings. The portrayals of these animals are exceptionally recognizable to our perusers to
require any further clarifications."

Refrain 51. To the extent that the ruler of the second (from Arudha) ooccupies a moveabie, or a
fixed or a typical sign, the taken abundance is far away, is close, is halfway. There are two sorts
of criminals, viz., (a) abhyanthara (b) bahya. The third house signifies the previous while the
sixth administers the last option. If the master of one of these joins with or is aspected by the
ruler of the second, or then again if a chura planet possesses the eleventh, one might say that the
missing abundance has been taken. On the off chance that the masters of chora houses are not
associated with the ruler of the second or the eleventh, then, at that point, the missing abundance
has not been taken yet is just lost.
NOTES
Chora houses are the sixth and the sign involved by the ruler of the sixth.
Verse 52. On the off chance that the ascendant is claimed, joined or aspected by a malefic, the
taken abundance can't be got back. On the off chance that the ascendant (possessed or joined by a
malefic) is aspected by a benefic, a part of the abundance will be recuperated; or full abundance
at a far off time or the lost abundance will be supplanted by another. Assuming it is possessed,
joined and aspected by benefics, the entire sum will be got back. Assuming it is claimed or
joined by benefics yet aspected by a malefic, the cash can't be got back however it tends to be
found where it is.
Refrain 53. Assuming that the full Moon is in the ascendant aspected by Jupiter or Venus or
then again assuming that a benefic involves the eleventh house, the lost abundance can be
recuperated soon.
Verse 54. Here we have given just a concise record of nashta prasna or questions bearing on lost
articles. The individuals who are envious of learning more might allude to the popular

 composition Krishneeya.

Nashta Jataka

Verse 1. To discover the four elements starting from the birth star of the querist, the technique
inferred in the refrain "moortitwe" is clarified in the accompanying not many verses.
NOTES
This section is entitled Nashta Jataka. At the point when an individual doesn't have a clue about
his introduction to the world time or has no horoscope yet at the same time needs his life read, a
birth horoscope can be ready as indicated by specific guidelines, and they have been portrayed
here.
Verse 2. The zodiacal elements allocated from Aries to Pisces separately are 12, 5, 10, 3, 8, 1, 6,
11, 4, 2, 9 and 7. This is to be deducted from the root or base number 49, the equilibrium
increased by 7 and the item separated by 27. The rest of from Aswini gives the birth star.
NOTES
The 12 signs have been doled out numbers as follows: Aries 12, Taurus 5, Gemini 10, Cancer 3.
Leo 8, Virgo 1, Libra 6, Scorpio 11, Sagittarius 4, Capricorn 2, Aquarius 9 and Pisces 7.
The base or Kuta number is 49. Model:
(a)

Arudha Lagna = Scorpio.

(b)

The number doled out to it is 11.

(c)

Deducting 11 from the base number 49, we get 49 - 11 = 38.

(d)

Multiplying the equilibrium by 7, we get 38 x 7 = 266.

(e)

Dividing the item by 27, we get 266/27 = 9 or more leftover portion 23.

(f)

Counting 23 from Aswini, we get Dhanishta as the birth star.

Verse 3. To decide the place of Jupiter, the ascendant and the Sun separately (at the hour of
birth) deduct 7, 14 and 21 from Kuta (49). Along these lines we get as root numbers 42 for
Jupiter, 35 for the Ascendant and 28 for the Sun. Deduct the number distributed to every one of
the signs (zodiacal variables) as in the past refrain from the base numbers. The equilibrium is to
be duplicated by 7 and partitioned by 27. The rest of each case is the group of stars involved by
Jupiter, the Sun and ascendant individually, counted from Aswini.
NOTES
The technique proposed in these refrains for developing the birth diagram in instances of obscure
birth time, varies from those suggested in Brihat Jataka and other standard works of art.

This verse gives a technique for learning based on Prasna graph, the nakshatra or the star

 grouping involved by Jupiter, the ascendant and the Sun at the hour of birth. The number 49
(Kuta) is taken as the beginning stage.
Model:
What were the planetary situations upon entering the world of the local X whose birth subtleties
are not accessible ?
11-10 a.m. (First) on 13-12-1984 (Thursday) at 13° N, 77° E 35'.

(Positions are just estimated in the question outline) As in Stanza 2, the Kuta here additionally is
49.
Assurance of Jupiter's position
49 - 7 = 42 Root number for Jupiter
Jupiter is in Sagittarius in the Prasna diagram. The number doled out to Sagittarius is 4. Jupiter's
root number less 4=42-4 = 38
38 x 7 = 266. Separating 266 by 27 we get 266/27 = 9 in addition to 23 remaining portion.
Counting 23 from Aswini, we get Dhanishta as the group of stars involved by Jupiter upon
entering the world. Assurance of the Ascendant/
49 - 14 = 35 Root number for the Ascendant.
The Ascendant at question time is Aquarius which is allocated the worth 9.
Thusly, Ascendant root number short 9 = 35 - 9 - 26: 26 x 7 = 182. Partitioning 182 by
27 we get 6 in addition to 20 as remaining portion.
Counting 20 from Aswini, we get the star grouping involved by the Ascendant as Poorvashadha.

Assurance of the Sun
49 - 21 - 28 - Root number for the Sun.
The Sun at the question is in Scorpio whose number is 11. The Sun's root number short 11=2S 11-17
17 x 7 = 119. Isolating 119 by 27 we get 119/27 = 4 in addition to 11 as the rest of.
Counting 11 from Aswini, we get Pubba as the heavenly body involved by the Sun at
birth.
Refrain 4. Increase the terminated piece (in ghatis) of the Navamsa involved by the
Moon by 9, partition the item by 27. The rest of from Aswini gives the Janma Nakshatra (or the
birth star). The birth star can likewise be gotten by treating the ascendant at the hour of inquiry in
like manner.

 NOTES
Allow us to take on the place of the Moon at the hour of inquiry is Virgo 22°. He has passed six
Navamsas and is in the seventh. the terminated longitude in the seventh being 2°.
The Moon takes approximately 60 ghatikas to travel one asterism or 13° 20' of a circular
segment. Subsequently for every level of longitude, the comparing time will be 4 ghatis 30
vighatis and for each Navamsa 15 ghatis.
Model
Moon =28° 16', i.e., in Pisces Navamsa; i.e., the Moon has crossed 1° 36' in Pisces Navamsa.
The Moon takes roughly 60 ghatis to cover 1 aste-rism or 13° 20' of curve. i.e., 800': 60 x 60
vgh.:: 96: X
X = 60 x 60 x 96/800 = 482 vgh. or on the other hand 7gh. 12 vgh. = 7.2 ghatis.
7.2 x 9 = 64.8/27 or more 10.8
The group of stars upon entering the world is the eleventh or Pubba.
The Lagna longitude can likewise be comparatively managed. In any case, which star grouping that showed up at from the Moon or the one showed up at from the ascendant - is to be taken is
left in uncertainty.

Refrain 5. Varaha Mihira in his Brihat Jataka in the section on 'Nashta Jataka' has managed
certain nimittas or characteristic signs with the assistance of which the place of the Moon upon
entering the world can be discovered.
NOTES
In the accompanying verses, the creator records the nimittas or characteristic signs via cautiously
taking note of which one can gather the Moon's situation at the hour of a querist's introduction to
the world.
Refrain 6. If at the time an inquiry is put, the soothsayer sees before him pricky leaves or prickly
plants or goats, the picture or image of a goat or woolen covers; or on the other hand assuming
he hears a goat's cry or the name of goat referenced, it very well might be induced that the
querist's introduction to the world Moon was in Aries. Likewise assuming that the celestial
prophet sees a bull, cow, the skin of these creatures, pictures or photos of these creatures, furrow,
burden, ghee, grass and straw, or then again assuming the names of these creatures are heard
referenced, the Moon's position is in Taurus.
Refrain 7. The querist's Moon will be in Gemini assuming the characteristic signs are: a couple
meeting up, instruments like Veena, beds or dozing materials or thambula are seen. Mud-crab,
old leaves and water show Cancer.
Leo is meant assuming notice of lions and tigers is made or their pictures seen or on the other
hand if elephants, deer and pigs are seen or their sounds heard. Characteristic finishes paperwork

 for Virgo are boats, lights, paddy, consuming soot or stories with respect to these.
Verse 8. Stock, measures, gauging machines, bartering, dealers, counting, gauging, show Libra;
Scorpio demonstrates snakes, scorpions, vermin and visha vaidya. Bows and bolts, a man
bearing these or ponies connote Sagittarius.
Refrain 9. Capricorn indicates the group of deer, their horns and skins, hearing their sounds.
Aquarius is meant by pots, potters and water pots. Pisces will be the querist's Moon sign
assuming the characteristic signs are fishes, nets and water. On the off chance that these signs are
seen or then again assuming their names are heard referenced, the fitting sign ought to be thought
of.
NOTES
The study of nimittas is a profound one dependent maybe upon the enthusiasm for the way that
in Nature everything is interrelated and not confined When an individual who is going to begin a
task experiences the intersection of a feline he feels achievement may not go to his task. The
feline as such has nothing to do with the individual or the task. Nor is it a happenstance. As Carl
Jung says, it is synchronicity and such a peculiarity provides us with a sign of what is probably
going to occur.
The nimittas recorded in the above verses for fixing the Moon sign upon entering the world are
just characteristic. To know his Janma Rasi, which he doesn't know about, and if around then
somebody conveying deer horns passes before the celestial prophet, he can expect that the Moon
was in Capricorn. A soothsayer who wishes to go by nimittas ought to be exceptionally capable
and married to an existence of effortlessness, truth and lowliness.

Refrain 10. The birth Moon of the querist will be the most grounded sign out of the ascendant,
the fifth or the ninth from it at the hour of inquiry. On the off chance that they are similarly solid,
the sign showed by the organ the querist ends up contacting at the hour of question, or the sign
where he stands, or the sign connoted by the Prasna letters will be the Janma Rasi.
NOTES
The inquiry Lagna is Aquarius. Along these lines, either Aquarius, Gemini or Libra can be the
birth Moon-indication of the querent, the most grounded sign being the most probable. Of the
three, Gemini being the most grounded, it very well may be gathered to be the Moon-sign upon
entering the world.
Verse 11. Take the most grounded of the planets aspecting Arudha. Proportionately as such a
planet possesses an odd or even sign, the extreme Moon is in an odd or even sign claimed by the
concerned planet. The topic of odd or even doesn't emerge as to the Sun and the Moon.
Assuming there are no aspecting planets, take the most grounded of the four among Arudha, the
fourth, the seventh and the tenth accordingly. Moreover the birth ascendant can be taken as the
most grounded of the Lagna, the fourth, the seventh or the tenth, or the sign claimed by the more
grounded planet aspecting the question ascendant.
NOTES

 In the graph over, no planets viewpoint Arudha. Of Aquarius (the fourth), Taurus (the seventh),
Leo (the tenth) and Scorpio (Arudha), the most grounded is Scorpio. This turns into the Moonsign upon entering the world. Of the Lagna (Aquarius), the fourth, the seventh and the tenth,
Scorpio is the most grounded. This turns into the ascendant upon entering the world. Under verse
3, the mathematical strategy gives Sagittarius as the birth ascendant and refrain 4 offers Leo as
the birth Moon-hint. By an insightful plan of action to nimittas one sign for each Lagna and the
Moon should be not entirely settled.

Refrain 12. Count from Arudha to the ascendant. Twofold this number. Deduct from this the
quantity of the work day and add to the equilibrium the quantity of the heavenly body at the hour
of Prasna. Erasing 27 and counting the rest of Aswini, will give the birth asterism.
NOTES
Model
(a)

Arudha to the ascendant - Scorpio to Aquarius - 4

(b)

Doubling 4, we get 8

(c)

8 - Weekday (Thursday) = 8-5 = 3.

(d)

3 + group of stars at Prasna (Aslesha)

i.e., 3 + 9 = 12. Since the 6gure is under 27, count 12 from Aswini to get the birth heavenly
body. Makha is the birth star.
Verse 13. Take the quantity of people present at the hour of putting an inquiry including the
celestial prophet and the examiner. Increase this by 3 and separation the item by
27. The leftover portion counted from Aswini or Makha or Moola, to the extent that the
ascendant fat the hour of question) is a moveable, fixed or normal sign gives the birth star.
NOTES
Assume the quantity of people present at the hour of inquiry (counting the soothsayer and the
consultor) is 8. Duplicating this by 3, we get 24. As it is inseparable by 27, count 24 from Makha
(as the ascendant Aquarius is a decent sign). This gives Bharani as the birth star.
Refrain 14. The birth month is to be fixed as follows: When the Sun involves the 6 signs starting
from Arudha, the birth will be in Uttarayana. Whenever he possesses the 6 signs from the
seventh house, then, at that point, it is Dakshinayana.
At the point when the Sun possesses Arudha sign, the birth month is Gemini; on the off chance
that he is in the twelfth consequently, it is Cancer; assuming he is in the eleventh house, Leo; if
in the tenth, Virgo; if in the ninth, Libra. In this manner the (sunlight based) month of birth is to
be found out.
Refrain 15. Assuming the ascendant at the hour of inquiry falls in the initial 15 degrees, the birth
is in Uttarayana; on the off chance that it is the last part of the sign, the birth is in Dakshinayana.
Proportionately as at the hour of inquiry, the examiner contacts the left or right half of his body,

 the birth is in Dakshinayana or Uttarayana.
Increase the quantity of Arudha sign counted from Aries by 9 and separation the item by 27. The
rest of from Asvvini will give the Nakshatra at the hour of birth.
Refrains 16 and 17. Assuming the ascendant at the hour of the question is odd, it is to be
deduced the local is brought into the world in the initial six signs counted from Aries. Here the
initial 15 degrees is to be assigned to three Rasis, the initial 5 is Taurus, the following 5 Gemini
and the following 5 to Aries. On the off chance that the ascendant turns out to be in the final part
of an odd sign, the birth ascendant is to be Leo, Virgo and Cancer (note the request).
On account of even signs, the birth ascendant will be one among the six counted from Libra.
Here once more, the request to be noted is Scorpio, Sagittarius and Libra. Assuming the question
ascendant is in the last part of an even sign, the request to be followed is Aquarius, Pisces and
Capricorn (5° each).
NOTES
The standards are basic.
Model: Suppose the question ascendant is 23° in Aries, an odd sign, the birth ascendant is one of
the signs from Aries to Virgo. On the off chance that it is in the final part of an odd sign, the
birth ascendant can be either Leo, Virgo or Cancer. The ascendant point has fallen in the second
part (20° to 25°) of the last part of the sign. Hence the ascendant is Virgo.
Verse 19. From Ashta Mangala number, the extended period of the birth, month, Nakshatra and
Lagna can likewise be found out.
Verse 20. Keep the Moon's longitude in two spots. From one deduct the ascendant point. Add
the rest of the first longitude of the Moon. This can be considered as the Moon's situation at the
hour of birth.
Refrain 21. Assuming the question ascendant is Aries, the birth month is Vaisakha; if Taurus,
the month is Jyeshta. In a specific order we can work out for the rest, of the signs. Again
assuming Lagna is odd and is aspected by male planets, the birth is in the splendid half; in the
event that the ascendant sign is even, and is aspected by female planets, the birth is uninformed
half.
NOTES
Assuming Lagna sign is odd and is aspected by female planets, the most grounded ought to be
taken and the paksha fixed.
Refrain 22. Assuming you see or hear any signs or sounds, which can be ordered under any
Drekkana sign, then, at that point, it is to be derived that the Sun involves that Drekkana.
Verse 23. The sign involved by the ruler of worship indication of the master of Arudha, will be
the Moon's situation at the hour of the querist's introduction to the world. The sign involved by
the ruler of the weakness indication of the master of Arudha will be the birth ascendant. On the
off chance that the examiner ends up sitting at that point, take the seventh from question
ascendant; assuming he ends up standing, take the tenth; assuming he ends up getting up, take

 the ascendant sign itself; and on the off chance that he is going to sit, take the fourth. Such a sign
can be the ascendant upon entering the world.
Refrain 24. In Brihat Jataka, Varahamihira has itemized a strategy for fixing the birth ascendant
in the refrain "Hora Navamsa Prathima".
Refrain 25. Count the Decanates from the Drekkana ascending at the hour of inquiry to the
Decanate involved by the Sun at that point. Erase products of 12. The rest of from the rising sign
at inquiry will be the rising sign upon entering the world.

NOTES
This refrain just gives the strategies identified by Varahamihira in his Brihat Jataka.
Two strategies are given:
1.

The birth Lagna is the Navamsa indication of the inquiry Lagna.

For example in the event that in the question graph the Navamsa Lagna is Leo, in the birth
outline the Lagna will be Leo.
2.
Take the Drekkana of the ascendant in the inquiry graph. Count from it till the Drekkana
involved by the Sun. Note the quantity of Drekkanas, cancel products of 12. The rest of from the
question ascendant gives the birth ascendant.
Model: The second Drekkana of Taurus ascends at the hour of inquiry and the Sun is in the third
in Libra, The quantity of Drekkanas mediating between these two is - Taurus 2, Gemini 3,
Cancer 3, Leo 3, Virgo 3 and Libra 3 - absolute 17. Canceling the products of 12, the rest of 5,
which counted from Taurus gives Virgo as the birth ascendant.
Refrain 26. To the extent that the rising Drekkana at the question time is the first, the second or
the third, Jupiter upon entering the world will be in the ascendant sign or the fifth or the ninth
from it. Or then again Jupiter will be in the indication of the Drekkana held by him, or the fifth or
the ninth from it.

NOTES
This verse shows up from the beginning to fairly confound. Jupiter's situation upon entering the
world is discovered based on the sign ascending at the hour of the inquiry.
Model: Suppose the rising sign at inquiry is 22° Aquarius, and that implies the third Drekkana.
This implies Jupiter upon entering the world is in the ninth from the rising sign, viz., Libra.
In the inquiry diagram in the event that Jupiter is in the first Drekkana, in the birth graph he will
be in a similar sign; if in the second Drekkana, in the fifth from his question position; in the
third, in the ninth sign from his own inquiry position.
Verse 27. The Janma Kala Guru can be viewed as the Dwadasamsa Rasi of Udaya Lagna. The
Dwadasamsa indication of the ascendant at question will be the sign involved by Jupiter.

 Thinking about the lift weights of the querist and the 12-year pattern of Jupiter, his extreme
position can be fixed.
NOTES
A parivartana or pattern of Jupiter requires around 12 years. To learn the quantity of insurgencies
which Jupiter had passed in the querists case, the planet that possesses the ascendant at question
must be investigated. Assuming that it is the Moon, the number is 1, Mars - 2, Mercury - 3,
Venus - 4; Jupiter - 5, the Sun - 6, Saturn - 7. Assuming that there is more than one planet in the
ascendant, the most grounded planet should be taken and the quantity of insurgencies finished
fixed. The Moon in Lagna means 12 years, Mars 24 years, Mercury 86 years, and so on, in a
specific order. On the off chance that there are no planets in Lagna, the quantity of upheavals
ought to be fixed from the master of the Lagna. By checking out the actual qualities of the man,
the quantity of upheavals can be confirmed.
Verse 28. One Rasi - three Drekkanas; one Drekkana = 10 degrees; 1/12 Drekkana = 50 minutes
(Drekkana Dwadasamsa). Discover which Dwadasamsa of the Drekkana, the question ascendant
possesses. Count that number from the ascendant and Jupiter will be in the sign.so shown up at,
at the hour of birth. Proportionately as the question ascendant is in the first, second or third
Drekkana, Jupiter upon entering the world will possess the Navamsa indication of the inquiry
ascendant, or the fifth, or the ninth from it. The tenth house from the Navamsa of the Moon at the
hour of question will be the place of the Sun at the hour of birth.
Verses 29 to 33. Madhava depicts how Janma Nakshatra can be fixed by taking note of the
different pieces of the body starting from the head the examiner contacts at the hour of question.

Assuming he ends up contacting the head - Krittika; temple - Rohini; eyebrows - Mrigasira; ears
- Aridra; cheeks - Punarvasu; jaw - Pubba; teeth - Aslesha; neck - Makha; right shoulders Pubba; left shoulders - Uttara; hands - Hasta; fingers - Chitta; finger nails - Swati; chest Visakha; heart - Anuradha; bosoms - Jyeshta; stomach - Moola; right flanks - Poorvashadha; left
flanks- - Uttarashadha; navel - Sravana; midsection - Dhanishta; sex-organ - Satabhisha; right
thigh - Poorva-bhadra; left thigh - Uttarabhadra; knee covers - Revati; lower part of the knees Aswini; and feet - Bharani.
Or on the other hand the 26th star counted from the question star will be the birth asterism; or the
birth star can be found out based on the appendages contacted by the querist plainly.
NOTES
A few strategies have been given for determinig the Ascendant, the Moon-sign, the Sun and
Jupiter at the hour of birth, when the birth points of interest of the local are not accessible. Some
of the time every technique offers an alternate hint or star grouping. The crystal gazer must,
utilizing these signs and furthermore giving due consideration to signs at the hour of question
and by noticing cautiously the querent's actual appearance, estimated age and idiosyncrasies,
consolidate the changing hints to decide the local's Ascendant, Moon-sign, birth-Sun and birthJupiter. Perusers may likewise allude to the part on Nashta Jataka or Unknown Birth Times in
Hindu Predictive Astrology.

 On Dreams

Verse 1. If in a question graph, the Sun involves the ascendant or the Moon perspectives the
ascendant, or the seventh house turns out to be the Sun sign, it should be derived that the
individual had dreams the earlier evening. The term of the fantasies will relate to the lapsed piece
of the ascendant. The time can be discovered from the ruler of Lagna moreover. Assuming that
the master of Lagna is the Moon, it was uniquely for a couple of moments (kshana). For different
planets take the Naisarga time frames.
NOTES
Assuming any body puts the inquiry, "Have I had any fantasies today? assuming this is the case,
what is the idea of the fantasies?" the mixes given in this verse must be applied.
Refrains 2 to 5. Assuming the Sun involves the rising sign, consuming fire, blasting lights, red
garments, and so forth, were seen; in the event that the Moon is in Lagna, ladies, white,
waterway and blossoms; if Mars, gold, pearls, red garments, crude tissue, streaming blood, and
so on; if Mercury the local imagined that he flew through the sky; if Jupiter, there was a cheerful
social party with relations; if Venus, the local crossed watery surfaces like lakes and oceans; and
if Saturn, he climbed slopes and raised spots. In the event that numerous planets are found in the
ascendant, these fantasies will be found reciprocally. In the event that these involve hostile or
weakness signs, the fantasies will be terrible. In the event that the planets are crushed in
planetary battle, again they will be awful. Assuming they are in burning, the fantasies will be
disconnected.
Refrains 6 to 9. The idea of dreams can be known from the idea of Arudha, Chathra, ascendant
and the fourth house in this way; Aries - sanctuaries; Taurus - devas; Gemini- Brahmins and holy
people; Cancer - water containing vegetation and grass cut from the earth; Leo - slope men and
bison; Virgo - dwelling together with ladies; Libra - gold, shippers and people with great
influence; Scorpio - ponies, creepy crawlies, poison; Sagittarius - barks of trees, blossoms and
organic products; Capricorn - people together; Aquarius - mirror; and Pisces - gold and seas.
NOTES
What one has found in his fantasy can be determined from the horoscope based on the Arudha
sign, or Chathra sign or the rising sign or the fourth house. It infers that the most grounded of the
above factors is to be thought of. Accepting that the rising sign is the most grounded and it turns
out to be Scorpio, the querist will have found in his fantasy ponies, bugs or toxic meds, and so
forth
Refrain 10. The above is taken from Jnana Pradeepika. Still there are some more characteristics
and they are separated out from Ashtanga Hridaya (a clinical composition).
Refrain 11. Assuming one dreams that when he is occupied with drinking alcohol alongside
dead men (pretas) be is hauled all over by a canine, the outcome is he will be assaulted by high
fever and kick the bucket.

 Refrains 12 to 15. Assuming one dreams that while wearing red blossoms and garments and
having one's body colored red and partaking in a wide range of joys, one is conveyed by a lady,
he will be assaulted by 'Rakta Pitta'. Riding on bison, pigs, canines or camels southwards shows
passing by utilization. Longing for thistles, creepers, bamboos and palm trees grew from one's
throat, indicates assault of Gulmaroga and demise from it.
Dreaming that while blessed in ghee with no garments on, playing out a homo, a lotus plant grew
from one's throat, it demonstrates assault by sickness and demise.
Finding in a fantasy that one with low class individuals enjoyed drinking ghee, margarine and
other sleek fluids, connotes an assault of premagha and demise from it.
Verse 16. The fantasy that one made a plunge waters while hitting the dance floor with
Rakshasas, will get one frenzy and passing. On the off chance that, nonetheless, he dreams that
he is moved by 'pretas' he will bite the dust from apasmara (epilepsy).
Verse 17. Assuming one dreams that he had a ride on a camel, feline, chimp, tiger, pig, pretas or
a jackal, he will get an unexpected incidental passing.
Refrain 18. In the wake of dreaming that one consumed an enormous amount of bread and
simmered things, he weaks up and spews exactly the same materials, he will pass on abruptly.
Assuming he dreams that he saw a shroud, he will get eye sickness.
Refrain 19. Dreaming that the Sun or the Moon tumbles down from the sky connotes loss of
vision.
Refrains 20 to 28. Assuming one longs for the accompanying, he is said to encounter terrifying
outcomes. Birds constructing their homes on the visionary's head; getting shaved; circled by
crows or falcons; encompassed by pretas, pisachas, ladies, meat eaters; losing all sense of
direction in byepaths loaded up with creepers, grass bamboos and prickly plants, resting in
incineration grounds or profound pits; ending up falling on residue and cinders; slipping on
watery surfaces, wells, tanks and grimy spots; being hauled somewhere around the power of
water flows; one sings, moves, plays on instruments; finishes oneself with red blossoms and red
garments; gets advanced age; becomes fat; covers one's body with oil; gets hitched; gets shaved;
eats prepared food and dishes; takes margarine and ghee; drinks alcohol; retches; gets iron and
gold; gets crushed in battle or in contention; gets detained; meets with mishaps; loses shoes; skin
in the legs gets dried; feels exceptionally thrilled, snickers at furious seniors and family elderly
folks.
Lights, stars, planets, teeth, symbols of Gods, one's own eyes, either tumble down or are
annihilated; slopes tumble down, one enters a timberland loaded up with red blossoms, or places
of evil demonstrations; gets into a dull chasm; rests in the consuming ghat; tumbles down from
slope tops or house tops; fishes alone; sees people with ochre robes, bare individuals, monks,
people with red eyes and dim minorities individuals.
Verse 29. Whenever ones finds in his fantasy a lady dark in shading, having inclination for
wicked activities, with long nails, hair and bosoms, and wearing blossoms and garments, having
no rosy tongue, he might kick the bucket early.
Refrains 30 and 31. Terrible dreams are brought about by the additional charge of the tridoshas

 in the anxious and tangible frameworks. Debilitated people ending up seeing such frightful
dreams are said to kick the bucket. Assuming that people of sound wellbeing see such dreams,
they will get perilous ailment. By God's approval, some might recuperate yet much of the time
such infection will end lethally.
Refrain 32. Drishta, Sruta, Anubhuta, Prar-thita, Kalpita, Bhavija and Doshaja are the seven
sorts of dreams. The initial five sorts of dreams don't achieve the showed results. Dreams seen
during daytime are likewise incapable.

NOTES
The old specialists in the peculiarity of dreams seem to have plunged profound into the subject
and their perspectives as respects the idea of dreams, what sort of dreams would predict
catastrophes, and so on, are currently drawing the consideration of clinicians and para-analysts.
Seven sorts of dreams are recorded in the above verse. They are drishta or things which one
might have found throughout everyday life; (2) shruta - things we have heard throughout
everyday life; (3) anubhuta - things really experienced through smell, taste and contact; (4)
prarthita - things wanted throughout everyday life; (5) kalpita - liked or nonexistent things; (6)
bhavija - excluded from the over 5 classes or those because of one's own creative mind; and (7)
doshaja - dreams brought about by an additional charge of tridoshas.
The creator gives off an impression of being of the assessment that the initial five sorts need not
be considered as the meant outcomes may not occur. He is additionally of the view that fantasies
experienced during daytime are of no importance.
Refrains 33 to 35. Dreams that are forgotten not long after waking, those seen constantly for
quite a while or seen before 12 PM are not powerful. It by any means, they will prove to be
fruitful after seemingly forever. Dreams found in the early morning hours will prove to be
fruitful the following day. In the event that one dozes after the fantasy, the impact will be nearly
nothing. Assuming one ends up seeing terrible dreams, dana, homo, japa, dhyana and puja
should be done to diminish the shrewd impacts. On the off chance that a decent dream is seen
after an awful dream, the previous alone will win.
Refrains 36 to 41. Coming up next are great dreams. One encountering them will get great
wellbeing and riches. Seeing divinities, Brahmins, cows, bulls, living family members, lords,
great individuals, consuming fire, tank with clear water, great watery surfaces, unmarried young
ladies, grinning attractive young men in white garments, rakshasas, splendid and blasting with
blood, umbrella, mirror, toxic medications, tissue, white blossoms, white dress, human excreta,
treatments, organic products, hillocks, house-tops and storeyed houses, trees having organic
products, men, lions, elephants, ponies ond different vehicles, streams, portages, seas, excursions
toward the north and east, sexual association with those ladies who couldn't be allured, demise,
escape from risk, fulfillment of pitris and heads

Verses 42 to 46. The reasons for dreams are: (a) irritation of the humors, (b) outcome of the
major and sub-periods, (c) stress or things over which one thinks a lot, (d) abhichara or mantra of

 foes, (e) guhyakas, (f) past relationship with different creatures. Dreams brought about by the
excitation or aggravation of vatha are: scaling slope tops and trees, going through skies. Dreams
brought about by the unsettling influence of pitha are described by seeing things brilliant and
dazzling as gold, red blossoms, as the Sun, fire, and so forth Dreams brought about by impassive
unsettling influence are: seeing the Moon, stars, white blossoms, lotus and streams. Dreams
made by aggravations the humors, wind, bile and mucus mean conventional outcomes, Dreams
brought about via planetary periods show impacts proper to them. Those brought about by chinta
and drishta will be equivalent to seen or wished. Dreams demonstrating that people are injured
by creatures contorted in shape are brought about by abhichara. Grihyakotha as seeing brilliant
and amazing things is brought about by the humor pitha. Dreams brought about by the planetary
periods and stress won't be compelling.
Refrain 47. A night has four Yamas. Assuming the fantasy is found in the first Yama, the
outcome will be, before the pass of one entire year; in the second, prior to the pass of a half year;
in the third, before the pass of 90 days; and in the fourth, before the pass of one month.
Assuming the fantasy happens at first light, the outcome happens soon.
Verses 48 to 58. The idea of dreams must be gained from different works. Here is a fantasy,
described in Ramayana seen by Bharata. "I saw my dad tumbling down from the highest point of
a mountain into a profound arrangement of cowdung wearing messy dresses and with hair
loosened; the seas dried, the Moon having tumbled down and the earth invaded by troubling
obscurity; the tusk of the illustrious elephant torn away and the blasting fire out of nowhere
doused; my dad sitting on an iron lofty position wearing a red dress and (around then) being
railed by copper shaded and dull ladies; my liberal dad beginning toward the south wearing red
festoons of blossoms, spread with red salves, and traveling on a jackass burdened chariot; my
dad being hauled by a demoness wearing red dress, having a twisted face and placing on a face
of constrained grin; my throat gets dried, mind has no harmony, I, Sri Rama, father or
Lakshmana, will bite the dust. Isn't my dad blissful at this point? are my siblings Rama and
Lakshmana not liberated from all illness?; Sri Rama's mom likewise is liberated from all
infections; the mother of Lakshmana additionally is liberated from ailment; my mom who isn't
great is likewise liberated from ailment; what does she say ?"
Verse 59. The fantasy described above is an extremely terrible one, as the outcomes that came
from it impacted his folks, his siblings and more than all his own life.
Refrains 60 and 6L If a Brahmin sees a fantasy showing that an individual is drinking alcohol or
blood, then, at that point, he will get learning or information. In the event that some other than a
Brahmin sees this, he will get riches. Assuming a customary man finds in dream ruler, elephant,
ponies, bulls and cows and a debilitated man, his cravings will bear realization. In the event that
an individual brought into the world in an illustrious family sees this, he will before long turn
into a lord.
Verse 62. Assuming an individual dreams that he has acquired sandalwood glue, lounge chair,
pearls, betel leaves, jathi bloom and riches, it is excellent.
Refrain 63. Assuming an individual finds in his fantasy that he is chomped by bugs or
bloodsuckers, he will get kids or abundance. Assuming he finds in a fantasy that he is entering a
porch, he will end up being a ruler however brought into the world in a low family.

 Verse 64. In the event that he finds in a fantasy as though eating some ghee arrangements
(payasa) in a filthy lotus leaf in a tank, he will end up being a scholarly savant.
Verse 65. If in the fantasy one sees krauncha bird (rooster)" or kukkuta or balaka bird and
awakens out of nowhere, he will get a spouse with charming words or a young lady with
comparable capabilities.
Verses 66 and 67. Assuming a debilitated man sees the globes of the Sun and the Moon in a
fantasy, then, at that point, be will recuperate from infection soon. A man without ailment will
get abundance and wellbeing, of he sees blasting fire, blossoms, organic products, mirror, rubies,
pot containing curd, rice and milk, he will end up being a prosperous man.
Refrain 68. Dreams found in the principal yama of the night will prove to be fruitful in one year,
in the second yama in 8 months, in the third in 90 days and in the fourth in 10 days.

Ashtakavarga

Refrain 1. In the section managing the topic of issues, a reference has been made to
Ashtakavarga. How it is to be functioned is nitty gritty in this section.
Verse 2. In his own Ashtakavarga the Sun's benefic spots are 1-2-4-7-8-9-10-11 from himself,
similar spots from Mars and Saturn; the third, sixth, tenth and eleventh from the Moon; third,
fifth, sixth, ninth, tenth eleventh and twelfth from Mercury; the fifth, sixth, ninth and eleventh
from Jupiter: the sixth, seventh and twelfth from Venus; and the third, fourth, sixth, tenth,
eleventh and twelfth from the ascendant.
Verse 3. In his own Ashtakavarga, the Moon is propitious in the third, sixth, seventh, eighth,
tenth and eleventh from the Sun; in the first, third, sixth, seventh, tenth and eleventh from
himself; in the second, third, fifth, sixth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from Mars; in the third, fourth,
fifth, seventh, eighth, tenth and eleventh from Mercury; in the second, fourth, seventh, eighth,
tenth and eleventh from Jupiter; in the third, fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth and eleventh from
Venus; in the third, fifth, seventh and eleventh from Saturn; and in the third, sixth, tenth and
eleventh from the ascendant.
Verse 4. The benefic spots of Mars in his Ashtakavarga will be they third, fifth, sixth, tenth and
eleventh and from the Sun; the third, sixth, eleventh, from the Moon; the first, second, fourth,
seventh, eighth, tenth and eleventh from himself; the third, fifth, sixth and eleventh from
Mercury; the sixth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth from Jupiter; the sixth, eighth, eleventh and
twelfth from Venus; the first, fourth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from Saturn; and
the first, third, sixth, tenth and eleventh from the ascendant.
Refrains 5 and 6. The benefic spots of Mercury Ashtakavarga will be the fifth, sixth, ninth,
eleventh and twelfth from the Sun; the second, fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth and eleventh from the
Moon; the first, second, fourth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from Mars; the first,
third, fifth, sixth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth from his own; the sixth, eighth, eleventh and
twelfth from Jupiter; the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, eighth, ninth and tenth from Venus; the

 first, second, fourth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from Saturn; and the first, second,
fourth, sixth, eighth, tenth and eleventh from the ascendant.
Refrains 7 and 8. The benefic spots of Jupiter in his Ashtakavarga will be the first, second,
third, fourth, 7ih, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from the Sun; the second, fifth, seventh, ninth
and eleventh from the Moon; the first, 2nd[ fourth, seventh, eighth, tenth and eleventh from
Mars: the first, second, fourth, fifth, sixth, eighth, tenth and eleventh from Mercury; the first,
second, third, fourth, seventh, eighth, tenth and eleventh from his own; the second, fifth, sixth,
ninth, tenth and eleventh from his own; the second, fifth, sixth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from
Venus; the third, fifth, sixth and twelfth from Saturn; and the first, second, fourth, fifth, 6tb,
seventh, ninth, tenth and eleventh from the ascendant.
Verse 9. The benefic spots of Venus in his Ashtakavarga will be the eighth, eleventh and twelfth
from the Sun; the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, eighth, ninth, eleventh and twelfth from the
Moon; the third, fourth, sixth, ninth, eleventh and twelfth from Mars; the third, fifth, sixth, ninth
and eleventh from Mercury; the fifth, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from Jupiter; the first,
second, third, fourth, fifth, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from his own; the third, fourth, fifth,
eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh from Saturn; and the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, eighth,
ninth and eleventh from the ascendant.
Verses 10 and 11. The benefic spots of Saturn in his Ashtavarga will be the first, second, fourth,
seventh, eighth, tenth and eleventh from the Sun; the third, sixth and the eleventh from the
Moon; the third, fifth, sixth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth from Mars; the sixth, eighth, ninth, tenth,
eleventh and twelfth from Mercury; the fifth, sixth, eleventh and twelfth from Jupiter; the sixth,
seventh and twelfth from Venus; the third, fifth, sixth and eleventh from his own; and the first,
third, fourth, sixth, tenth and eleventh from the ascendant.
The figures have been given based on letter sets. The spots given above are to be figured from
their situations in the horoscope.
Verse 12. In giving the digits, letters showing zero (0) are to be taken as 10. The past number is
9. Na is 10, Ka is 12 and Ra or Pra is 12.
Verse 13. In denoting the benefic submits, a specific request has been trailed by Varaha Mihira
in his Brihat Jataka. That request must be continued to know, in advance, the request for
decreases i.e., sodhana karma.
Refrain 14. The signs which have no akshas or benefic focuses are to be considered as adhama
or least signs with 1, 2, 3, are likewise adhama (low). Those with four are madhyama or
moderate in strength: or more 4 are sobhana or propitious.
Refrain 15. At the point when the Sun travels in his own Ashtakavarga signs having 8 bindus the
impacts will be riches and thriving from regal blessing; 7 - magnificent government assistance,
satisfaction and pageantry; 6 - rising influence: 5 - abundance; 4 - both great and awful will be
equivalent; 3 - weariness through venture; 2 - wicked activities; 1 - extreme disorder; no bindus passing.
Refrain 16. In his own Ashtakavarga the Moon while on the way gives the accompanying
outcomes; a sign counting 8 bindus - bliss, thriving, ceremony and help from family members; 7-

 acquire of garments, agreeable food, gain from family members; 5 - fortitude and mental
fulfillment; 4 - wretchedness and medical affliction; 3 - fight with relations; 2 - squabbles
achieved by one's significant other and one's abundance; 1 - hopeless misfortunes; and no bindus
- distress, outrageous frenzy and passing.

Verse 17. Whenever Mars in his own Ashtakavarga travels signs with 8 bindus - gain of landed
property and cash, triumph; 7 - success, through siblings; 6 - favor through lords; 5 - satisfying
encounters; 4 - great and awful in equivalent extent; 3 - division from siblings and ladies; 2 fight because of spouse and abundance; 1 - dread from weapon, shoot and sicknesses as little
pox, and so forth; and no bindu - infections in the stomach, fits and passing.
Verse 18. Whenever Mercury travels in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus - regard from
rulers; 7 - increment of riches and learning; 6 - achievement going to all endeavors; 5 compromise with relations; 4 - need of soul in all things; 3 - tension through upset
contemplations; 2 - illnesses brought about by the tridosha; 1 - detainment forcibly and
unforeseen cataclysms: and no bindu - demise brought about by loss of everything.
Refrain 19. At the point when Jupiter travels in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus sway and royal thriving; 7 - gain of abundance and bliss; 6 - gain of garments, vehicles and gold;
5 - ruin to adversaries, achievement of wanted articles; 4 - gain and misfortune equivalent; 3 apprehensive weakness and ear illnesses; 2 - regal grimaces; 1 - loss of riches and relations; and
no bindu - insanity of the psyche, loss of abundance and kids.
Verse 20. Whenever Venus travels in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus - solace from
great garments, ladies, blossoms and healthy food; 7 - gain of trimmings and pearls; 6 - joy from
pleasing spouse; 5 - meeting with companions; 4 - great and awful equivalent; 3 - fight with
individuals of the area and family members; 2 - sicknesses and excusal from one's calling; 1 dread from water and poison; and no bindu - a wide range of cataclysms.
Refrain 21. At the point when Saturn travels in his own Ashtakavarga signs with 8 bindus procurement of authoritative command over a town or a town; 7 - gain of workers (house
keeper), or asses or camels; 6 - regard from hoodlums, slope clans and armed force boss; 5 - gain
of grains; 4 - great and terrible equivalent; 3 - loss of abundance, workers, spouse and bliss; 2 detainment, dread and sicknesses; 1 - filthy fallen life; and no bindu - sick karma in all things.
NOTES
The impacts proclaimed for planets traveling the various signs in their own Ashtakavargas are
specified previously. The portrayal of results is general and ought not be applied word for word.
Besides impacts of travels as from the Moon are likewise to be thought of. Assume Saturn
travels the twelfth from the Moon which might turn out to be the third sign having 6 bindus from
his situation, in his own Ashtakavurga. How to accommodate the outcomes? This is an intense
issue for an understudy of soothsaying. I have managed this subject exhaustively in my book
Ashtakavarga System of Prediction to which I would allude my perusers.

Verse 22. Whenever planets travel signs with no bindus they produce just underhanded.

 Comparatively when they travel signs with 8 bindus, the outcomes will be splendid. Each sign
has 8 kakshyas or circles. Whenever a planet travels in its own ashtakavarga a kakshya without
bindus, evil can occur. Just when he travels the kakshya claimed by the master who has
contributed a bindu (aksha ruler), kindness occur. In this manner should be concentrated on great
causing and evil delivering kakshyas.
NOTES
Here a reference is made to kakshya or an orbital division. There are 8 kakshyas of 33/4 degrees
in a sign managed individually by Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon and the
Ascendant.
Coming up next is imitated from my book Ashtakavarga System of Prediction:
Prasthara Ashtakavarga
We have until now figured out how to project Bhinnashtakavargas of the various planets, the
joined Ashtakavargas of all planets and the decrease of the bindus by the cycles of Trikona and
Ekadhipatya.
The following in significance is the diagrammatic portrayal of fanning out the benefic focuses
(bindus) contributed or gave by every planet in regard of each Ashtakavarga. The benefic
focuses (bindus) contributed by every one of the planets are detached so that while anticipating
Gochara or travel results or deciphering Dasas or investigating Bhavas the specific time frame or
nature of impact can be plainly found. The plain portrayal of the fanning out or disengagement of
the benefic places, given out by every planet, is classified "Prasthara Chakra".
As indicated by old style journalists, attract east to west 9 lines and north to south 13 lines and in
this chakra (outline) containing 96 houses, enter the focuses contributed by every planet (before
decrease) in the slipping request of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon and
Lagna.
Coming up next is the Prasthara Chakra of the Sun's Ashtakavarga in the Standard Horoscope:
The Sun is in Virgo. Subsequently the fanning out begins from Virgo. In Table II, the bindus in
the even column against every planet demonstrate the favorable spots (in the Sun's
Ashtakavarga) from the Sun and from different planets. The bindus in the upward lines are those
contributed by the various planets figured in the request for their circles from the earth. For
instance the all out figure in Virgo (in Sun's Bhinnashtakavarga) is 4 and these four bindus are
contributed by Saturn, Mars, the Sun and Mercury. The Moon, Jupiter, Venus and Lagna have
not made any commitment. The Prasthara Chakras must be ready for every planet. Coming up
next are the Prasthara Chakras of different planets in the Standard Horoscope.
For example in the Sun's Prastharashtakavarga, no bindus have been contributed by Jupiter,
Venus, the itfoon and the Ascendant. Whenever the Sun travels his own kakshya (11° 15' to 15°)
kindness occur. Whenever the Sun travels the kakshyas without bindus horrible outcomes will
occur.

Verse 26. In the past section, the impacts of Ashtakavarga as perused from travels of planets

 have been given. The overall impacts of the Ashtaka-vargas will currently be given:
The Sun's Ashtakavarga Effects
Refrain 27. In the period of the Sun's travels in his own ashtakavarga of signs having more
promising bindus, it is propitious to perform wedding services and other great activities and
embrace significant distance ventures, and so on Whenever the traveled sign has under 4 bindus,
the contrary outcomes will occur.
Verse 28. One should venerate God Siva and serve the rulers, toward the path showed by the
sign having the biggest number of bindus. Thriving outcomes when the holy light is lit in the
evening to venerate Siva and respect to the lord is paid in the bearings implied by the signs
having the biggest number of bindus.
Verse 29. Total up the quantity of bindus in the four successive signs starting from the Sun; in
the following four signs from the fifth; and the following four signs from the ninth. Assuming
the principal all out is more prominent than the second or the third, the initial segment of the day
is really great for starting any propitious work like directing marriage, meeting significant people
and so forth On the off chance that the second is more noteworthy than first and third, the second
piece of the day will be great for these. On the off chance that the third is more prominent than
first and second, the third piece of the day is great. The piece of the day relating to the most unabsolute is ominous for any great work. The Moon's Ashtakavarga.
Verse 30. Whenever the Moon travels signs in his own Ashtakavarga containing more bindus, it
is promising to play out the principal shaved area of the child and all business pleasant to the
brain. For a man to wed a young lady, for a lord to utilize a worker, for a worker to serve a lord,
for an understudy to start studies under an instructor, for an educator to start instructing and for
all people to get relations and make companionships select the times of the Moon traveling signs
where bindus proliferate.
NOTES
While burdening sets, in marriage, take the man brought into the world in a sign having more
bindus as indicated by the female's horoscope as well as the other way around.
Verse 31. Seeing promptly toward the beginning of the day people brought into the world in
signs which are related with more bindus in the Moon's Ashtakavarga will demonstrate
productive. It is similarly great for giving gifts, for example, garments to people brought into the
world in such signs.
Refrain 32. Great work ought not be done when the Moon travels signs without bindus.
Obviously, those activities will be unprofitable. To connect with such individuals or to see such
individuals brought into the world in signs with no bindus in the first part of the day is useful of
insidiousness.
NOTES
Here the reference is to people brought into the world in signs without bindus in the Moon's
Ashtakavarga in their horoscopes.
Refrain 33. Wells and tanks found or dove in headings implied by signs holding numerous

 bindus are useful of wellbeing. To adore Durga and to honor sovereigns such Rasi Diks are great.

NOTES
The course shown by the sign holding the biggest quantities of bindus in the Moon's
ashtakavarga is positive for cleaning up, for taking beverages, for burrowing wells and tanks and
for loving Goddess Durga or meeting a sovereign. One is very much encouraged to separate
one's home or room toward the path recommended above for the reason for loving God.
Mars Ashtakavarga
Verses 34 and 35. Whenever Mars travels the bindu-proliferating signs in his own Ashtakavarga
exchanges associated with grounds or gold will be good. One should separate a room in such a
bearing for the love of God Subrahmanya and for meeting with the Army Chief or for managing
any exchanges connecting with grounds and gold and for cooking and directing Homas and
vanquishing foes. Whenever Mars travels a sign having under 4 bindus it isn't favorable for all
the above exercises.
NOTES
In this outline Aries has the largest number of bindus. During the time of travel of Mars in this
sign, it would be favorable to meet with military officials or people in power. Aries addresses
east. One can have his kitchen in the eastern piece of his home, or have homa performed.
Whenever Mars travels Cancer which has the most un-number of bindu or Pisces which has no
bindus the period isn't helpful for the exercises referenced previously.

Mercury's Ashtakavavga
Refrain 36. In Mercury's Ashtakavarga, assuming there are no bindus in the second house from
Mercury, the local will be quiet. Assuming that there are 2 or 3 bindus, his words will be
Chapala Vak.
Verse 37. Assuming that there are 4 bindus, he will actually want to give a reasonable answer.
Assuming that there are 5 or 6, he will talk pleasantly and his words will be regarded. Assuming
that there are 7 bindus, he will be a writer.
Verse 38. Assuming that there are 8 bindus in the second house from Lagna, the individual will
be unassailable in discourse. Assuming that there are no bindus in it, he can not stand up his own
necessities and wants.
Refrains 39 and 40. Assuming that there are bindus contributed by malefics, his discourse will
be impacted and vain magnificent. In the event that the bindus contributed are by benefics, he
will talk unobtrusively. If the bindu is contributed in the second by the Sun, his discourse will be
belittling; if by Mars, his discourse will be cruel and provocative; if by Mercury, satisfying; if by
Jupiter, clear and shrewd; if by Venus, has large amounts of Puranic stories and beliefs; and if by
Saturn, stirred up with misrepresentation.
Refrains 41 and 42. On the off chance that the second house from Mercury (in his own

 Ashtakavarga) has a bindu contributed by the Moon in weakness or possessing an adversary's
home, the local will talk freely and thoughtlessly various stuff. In the event that out of Rahu,
Gulika and Ketu, two of them possess the second house, he will enjoy harmful talk. In gatherings
he will just talk decay, for example, stealing, co-home, and sick reports of others, accounts of
low-conceived individuals and uncouth people. In the event that Gulika is in the second, he will
talk just disdainful words.
Verse 43. In the event that in his own Ashtakavarga Mercury involves a sign without any bindus,
the individual will be dis-energetic. A similar outcome can happen when Mercury travels such a
sign.
Refrains 44 and 45. At the point when Saturn travels the sign without bindus after decrease,
there will be loss of youngsters, siblings and companions. Assuming the said sign turns out to be
the third, sixth, eleventh from the Moon, it won't be just terrible. At the point when Saturn goes
on the way through signs with no bindus, the period will be disastrous.
Refrain 46. At the point when Saturn travels a sign that has no bindus in Mercury's
Ashtakavarga and which turns out to be the eighth or twelfth from the Moon, the individual will
either be lethally debilitated or kick the bucket.
Refrain 47. At the point when Mercury travels a sign which has 4 bindus, training should be
started. Any prosecution sent off then will be fruitful.
Refrain 48. The bearing demonstrated by the sign having the biggest number of bindus ought to
be chosen for starting training, for going to class and for diversion grounds. Such a course is
likewise ideal for adoring Vishnu and paying respect to the presumptive successor. For getting
achievement in prosecution one ought to pick the time at which the sign holding countless bindus
rises.

Jupiter Ashtakavarga
Refrain 49. At the point when Jupiter travels signs having more than 4 bindus in his own
Ashtakavarga the time is promising for strict capacities, inception into mantras performing japa,
homa, deva puja, Vedic investigations, taking care of Brahmins, undertaking therapeutic
measures to get kids, bringing in and setting aside money. At the point when he travels signs
having a couple bindus such activities will be unbeneficial.
Refrain 50. The spot, demonstrated by the sign having plentiful bindus, is to be chosen for
taking care of brahmins, performing mantra japa and every day welcome. Gold adornments and
different things ought to be kept toward the path showed by the Dik having more bindus; for
talking the Guru, learned Brahmin and priests, this course will be positive for accomplishment in
all endeavors.
Venus Ashtakavarga
Refrain 51. At the point when Venus travels in his own Ashtakavarga, signs having more
bindus, the time is hopeful for acquisition of beds, mats, pads, and so on, for starting
investigation of music, directing and doing everything for ordinary satisfaction.

 Verses 52 and 53. Subsequent to completing the decreases note the quantity of bindus. The spot
demonstrated by the sign-heading having more bindus is ideal for getting a woman hitched, to
have the room in the house and to get a lady from the course implied by the sign having the
largest number of bindus.
Saturn Ashtakavarga
Verse 54. Whenever Saturn travels signs having more number of bindus (in his own
Ashtakavarga), it is productive to utilize workers, and to start rural activities. Select that quarter
meant by the sign having the biggest number of bindus for development, for keeping
horticultural carries out, for building lavatories and for discarding reject, and for putting away
fuel.
Chara Chakra
Verse 55. All out the bindus in Aries and its thirds addressing the East; Taurus and its thirds
meaning South; Gemini and its thirds indicating West; and Cancer and its thirds implying North.
The course that has the biggest number of bindus is the most promising.
Verses 57 and 58. Up until this point we have managed individual Ashtakavarga. Aggregate
Ashtakavarga is presently nitty gritty. In a Rasi mark the accompanying numbers in standard
request starting from the Sun at the hour of birth: 3, 3, 3, 3, 2, 3, 4, 5, 3, 5, 7, 2; from the Moon 2,
3, 5, 2, 2, 5, 2, 2, 2, 3, 7, 1; from Mars 4, 5, 3, 5, 2, 3, 4, 4, 4, 6, 7, 2; from Mercury 3, 1, 5, 2, 6,
6, 1, 2, 5, 5, 7, 3; from Jupiter 2, 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 2. 4, 2, 4, 7, 3; from Venus 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4, 2, 3, 4, 3,
6, 3; from Saturn 3, 2, 4, 4, 4, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 6, 1; and from the ascendant 5, 3, 5, 5, 2, 6, 1, 2, 2, 6,
7, 1.
Verse 59. When the bindus in each sign are totalled Samudaya Ashtakavarga is acquired.

NOTES
When the bindus are totalled we get 43 for the Sun, 36 for the Moon, 49 for Mars, 46 for
Mercury, 36 for Jupiter, 40 for Venus, 42 for Saturn, and 45 for the ascendant, the all out being
337. This can be got by including the different individual Ashtakavargas.
Verse 60. In the aggregate Ashtakavarga, signs having more than 30 bindus can be supposed to
be awesome (sreshta); those getting somewhere in the range of 25 and 30 - ordinary
(madhyamd); and those under 25 - last (kashta). The best signs ought to be chosen for generally
great work, venture, and so forth, most horrendously terrible signs ought to be stayed away from.
People brought into the world in best signs can be taken for affiliation. They will get great.
People brought into the world in most terrible signs will be a wellspring of difficulty.
Verse 61. The aggregate of the bindus in the second, fourth, ninth, tenth and eleventh is known
as Vithaya (164). On the off chance that the all out surpasses 164, the local will be prosperous;
on the off chance that the absolute is under 164, his costs will be high; and assuming it is 164,
pay and consumption will be equivalent.
Verse 62. The aggregate of bindus in the sixth, eighth, twelfth houses is known as theertha (76).
In the event that it is under 76, pay will be more noteworthy. On the off chance that it surpasses

 76 costs will be more noteworthy. Assuming it is 76, both will be something very similar.
Verse 63. In the aggregate Ashtakavarga, the base number of bindus required are: Lagna 25,
second house 22, third house 29, fourth house 24, fifth house 25, sixth house 34, seventh house
19, eighth house 24, ninth house 29, tenth house 36, eleventh house 54 and twelfth house 16. On
the off chance that the numbers surpass these, the houses will be reinforced, assuming they are
not exactly these, the houses will be debilitated.
Verse 64. On the off chance that the fourth and the second houses, having gotten more than the
base recommended above, are distressed by malefics, the local will acquire family property. If
not he will have no fatherly abundance.
Refrain 65. In like manner assuming that the tenth house contains more than the base tie us and
is liberated from hardship, one will procure immense riches; on the off chance that the eleventh
house is likewise arranged, one will acquire with next to no effort.
Refrain 66. Assuming that the ascendant and the ninth house are likewise arranged, the local
will observe a mother lode at the age implied by the quantity of bindus in the ascendant.
Refrain 67. On the off chance that the bindus in the eleventh are more prominent than those in
the twelfth, one will become well off; assuming they are less he will become poor. In the event
that the bindus in the eleventh are more than those in the tenth, the local's benefits will be proper
to the efforts advanced. If not, they will be less.
Verse 68. Houses having essentially the base number of bindus showed in stanza 63, and
aspected by their particular rulers and unafflicted by malefics, will be productive of impacts. If
not the opposite will be the situation.
Refrain 69. The amount of the bindus in the first, the fifth and the ninth is known as bhanduka;
the amount of the bindus in the second, the sixth and the tenth is known as sevaka; the absolute
of the third, the seventh and the eleventh is poshaka; the all out of the fourth, the eighth and the
twelfth is ghataka. If ghataka number is more noteworthy than the rest, the local will be
hopelessly poor; assuming it is not exactly poshaka, one will be well off; if bhanduka number is
greater, one will have help from family members; in the event that it is less, he will have no
assistance from his family members and companions; and in the event that sevaka is more
prominent advantage from administration will be more noteworthy for him.
Refrain 70. Add together the bindus of the four signs from Pisces, four signs from Cancer and
four signs from Scorpio. Pisces to Gemini, Cancer to Libra and Scorpio to Aquarius address the
first, center and last pieces of life. Whichever absolute of the three segments of life, is most
prominent, it demonstrates joy and success during that time of life. The time of life relating to the
less number of bindus will be set apart by infection and distress.
Refrain 71. Kendra, Panapara and Apoklima houses signify the three segments of life. Add
together the bindus in every one of these segments. That part of life will be cheerful and
prosperous, whose absolute is the best.

NOTES

 In verse 70, the three segments of life viz., adolescence, youth and advanced age are addressed
by Pisces to Gemini; Cancer to Libra; and Scorpio to Aquarius. The bindus in every one of these
areas is to be added together. That part of life - adolescence, youth or advanced age, will be
cheerful, whose complete is the best. Assume in a horoscope the first, second and last segments
get individually 110, 112 and 115. The cheerful time of life will be during his advanced age.
Kendra houses are the first, the fourth, the seventh and thelOth; panapara houses are the second,
the fifth, the eighth and the eleventh; and the apoklima houses are the third, the sixth, the ninth
and twelfth. All out the bindus in regard of the Kendra, Panapara and Apoklima houses. Here
that piece of life-youth, middle age and advanced age-will be blissful, the absolute in the part
having a place with which is the most noteworthy.
Verse 72. The all out of the bindus in the first, fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth and tenth houses is
antarbhaga. The all out of the bindus in the other houses is bahirbhaga. If antarbhaga number is
more prominent than bahirbhaga, mental harmony, regard for generally great karmas, instruction
and culture will result. Assuming bahirbhaga is more prominent than antarbhaga, ceremony,
vanity, power and hopelessness will be the outcome.
Verse 73. All out the bindus from the ascendant to the sign involved by Saturn, Saturn to the
ascendant; ascendant to Mars; and Mars to the ascendant severally. For each situation duplicate
the aggregate by 7 and separation the item by 27. The remainder will show the age when the
local will be tormented by infections and different setbacks.
NOTES
To know the long periods of mishap, a basic strategy is given. Complete the quantity of bindus
from the ascendant to the sign involved by Saturn (I); from the sign involved by Saturn to
ascendant (ii); from the ascendant to the sign involved by Mars (iii); and from the sign involved
by Mars to the ascendant (iv). Increase each of these (I, ii, iii and iv) by 7 and separation the item
by 27. The age at which one faces inconveniences correspnnds to the age equivalent to the
remainder. Assume the all out number of bindus in a horoscope from Lagna to Saturn is 229 (I)
and from Saturn to Lagna is 158 (ii); from Lagna to Mars is 307 (iii) and from Mars to Lagna is
83 (iv).
i)

229 x 7/27 = Quotient 59, Remainder 10

ii)
138 x 7/27 = Quotient 40, Remainder 26 iii) 307 x 7/27 = Quotient 79, Remainder 16 iv)
83 x 7/27 = Quotient 21, Remainder 14
The long periods of troublesome pressure, weakness will be 59, 40, 79 and 21. We can likewise
say that when malefics Saturn, Rahu and Mars travel the heavenly body connoted by the rest of,
faces a difficult situation, resistance and distress. For example in (I) the rest of 10 which counted
from Aswini gives Makha. Whenever Saturn, Mars and Rahu travel Makha the local is presented
to the incident of appalling occasions.

Refrain 74. In the year addressed by the bindus in the troublesome house involved by Rahu the
local will be impacted by poison. Correspondingly the age shown by Mars will observer careful
activity, and the age shown by Saturn will uncover distresses and infections.

 NOTES
Assume the signs involved by Rabu, Mars and Saturn have separately 38, 29 and 30 bindus. It
suggests that the years 38th, 29th and 30th will separately demonstrate clue of getting harmed,
probability of going through a medical procedure and confronting distresses and sicknesses. It
seems obvious me that the insidious outcomes proposed can happen just when the planets are
beset. In my own modest experience the years become critical for the outcomes concerned just
when the planets are in the eighth and the sixth. The soothsaying understudy can undoubtedly
test this guideline by concentrating on various horoscopes.
Verse 75. At the age relating to the bindus in the signs involved by Venus and Mercury, the
individual will appreciate riches, distinction and youngsters; have marriage and mental joy and
obtain schooling, honor and popularity.
NOTES
In the event that for example the figure in the sign involved by Jupiter is say 25, then, at that
point, at 25 years old, the local might generate a youngster and appreciate abundance and
notoriety. Likewise the signs with respect to Venus and Mercury ought to be noted. Before these
standards are applied one should ensure that the local has the proper mixes in the horoscope.
Verse 76. The Ashtakavarga diagrams can be applied to the understanding of Dasa results along
these lines: Mark the Ashtakavarga of the Dasa ruler. Partition the Dasa time frames into 12
sections. The primary (sub) period will be addressed by the sign wherein the ruler stands. The
second sub-period will be the second from the Dasa master, etc. Along these lines each subperiod will have similar number of months as Dasa period. The sub-times of the signs where
bindus flourish will be great; though, the sub-time of the Rasi wherein the bindus are less will be
for the most part awful.
NOTES
I have expounded this technique in my book Ashtakavarga System of Prediction, to which the
peruser is alluded. For the most part the consequences of a sub-period will relate to the Bhava to
which the sign being referred to has reference. Take for example the Dasa of Mercury set in Leo,
ascendant being Aquarius. The 12 sub-periods, every one of 17 months, will be shaped by the
sign involved by Mercury and the resulting 11 signs. The first sub-period demonstrates the
outcomes relating to the Bhava it implies. Here, the ascendant being Aquarius, the outcomes will
connect with the seventh house. Contingent on how Mercury is arranged here the outcomes will
be positive or negative. In the event that in Mercury's Ashtakavarga, Leo has more bindus results
will be more joyful. Assuming that it has no bindus, the seventh house results will be
unfavorably impacted.

Refrains 77 and 78. Bhinnashtakavarga is put to two sorts of decrease. In the issue of Trikona
Sodhana or three-sided decrease: if in one of the signs that make up the Trikona, the quantity of
bindus is 0, the bindus in the leftover bindus will be wiped out. On the off chance that the three
indications of a trikona bunch have bindus, deduct the most un-number from each of these. On
the off chance that equivalent number of bindus are in the indications of a ternion, dispense with

 divider. Assuming two signs have no bindus, eliminate the bindus in the third too.
Verse 79. Subsequent to doing trikona decrease, the ekadhipatya decrease ought to be completed
in regard of all signs with the exception of Cancer and Leo. If both the signs (possessed by a
similar planet) have a similar number of bindus dispense with both the figures. On the off chance
that the bindus in one sign are not exactly the other, deduct the more modest number from both.
Assuming that the two signs contain planets, don't kill the figures.
NOTES
Refrains 78 and 79 arrangement with trikona sadhana (three-sided decrease and ekadhipatya
sodhana (decrease because of responsibility for signs by a planet).
Aries, Leo and Sagittarius establish Mesha trikona. Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn make up
Vrishabha trikona; Gemini, Libra and Aquarius establish Mithuna trikona and Cancer, Scorpio
and Pisces have a place with Karkataka trikona. Decrease is to be applied to the bindus in each
trikona bunch.
After this the subsequent decreases (ekadhipatya sodhana) is to be done based on the
responsibility for signs each by a planet, Cancer and Leo being excepted.
There gives off an impression of being a few distinctions among traditional celestial journalists
with regards to how these decreases are to be completed.
I'm not explaining this subject further as I have managed it comprehensively in my Hindu
Predictive Astrology and Ashtakavarga System of Prediction with models. Consequently the
peruser is encouraged to peruse these books.
Zodiacal and Planetary Factors
Refrain 80. After the two decreases increase the leftover bindus in the various signs by their
individual zodiacal elements, viz., Taurus and Leo 10; Gemini and Scorpio 8; Libra and Aries 7;
Virgo and Capricorn 5; Cancer 4; Sagittarius 9; Aquarius 11; and Pisces 12; and include every
one of the 12 items. The outcome is Rasi Guna Yoga or amount of the zodiacal elements.
Similarly increase the bindus in the signs involved by the various planets by their particular
planetary variables, viz., the Sun 5, the Moon 5, Mars 8, Mercury 5, Jupiter 10, Venus 7 and
Saturn 5. The absolute of every one of these is Graha Guna Yoga or amount of the planetary
factors. Whenever the amounts of the zodiacal and planetary variables are added together,
Suddha pinda is gotten.
Refrain 81. Increase the bindus in the ninth from the Sun in his own Ashtakavarga (before
decrease), by the Suddha Pinda of the Sun. Partition the item by 27. The rest of, from Aswini,
will be the asterism, which when traveled by Saturn causes the demise of the dad.
Refrain 82. Increase absolute figures in the Sun's Ashtakavarga (after decrease) by the figures in
the ninth from the Sun. Partition the item by 27. The rest of from Aswini addresses the star
grouping, Saturn's travel of which will be lethal to the dad.
Refrain 83. In the wake of having fixed based on the Sun's Ashtakavarga the star grouping the
travel of which by Saturn causes the demise of father, we will manage the places of Jupiter and

 the Sun at the hour of father's passing.
Verse 84. The Suddha Pinda of the Sun ought to be duplicated by the figures in the seventh from
Jupiter in the Sun's Ashtakavarga and this item separated by 27 and the rest of from Aswini
demonstrates the star, the travel of which by Jupiter causes father's demise. Comparably increase
the Suddha Pinda of the Sun by this figure in the seventh, from the Sun (before decrease) in his
own Ashtakavarga. Partition the item by 27. The rest of Aswini provides the heavenly body with
the travel of which by the Sun demonstrates the dad's demise.
Verse 85. With the assistance of the Sun's Ashtakavarga, the month when the local will kick the
bucket can be determined. Again the places of Saturn, Jupiter and the Sun at the hour of mother's
passing can likewise be known. They are clarified beneath.
Verse 86. The rest of by isolating by 12, the result of the Sun's suddha pinda and the figures in
the 8tb from the Sun in his own Ashtakavarga (before decrease) shows the sign (counted from
Aries), the Sun's travel of which demonstrates the long stretch of the local's demise.
Refrain 87. Increase the figures in the fourth house from the Moon (before decrease) in his own
Ashtakavarga by his Suddha Pinda and gap the item by 27. The rest of from Aswini
demonstrates the star, Saturn's travel of which causes the mother's passing.
Verse 88. Similarly as we have determined the places of Jupiter and the Sun at the hour of death
of father from the Sun's Ashtakavarga, in similar way, we can discover their situations from the
Moon's Ashtakavarga at the hour of mother's passing.
Refrain 89. Increase the Suddha Pinda of Mars by the bindus in the third from Mars in his own
Ashtakavarga and separation the item by 12. The rest of from Aries addresses the sign, Jupiter's
travel of which demonstrates help from siblings. The Dasa of the master of this sign will likewise
be great for the local and siblings will do him great.
Verse 90. The quantity of bindus in the third from Mars in his own Ashtakavarga gives the
quantity of family. Characterization into male and female is reliant upon the sex of the planets
who have contributed the bindus. Similarly as we work out children from the Ashtakavarga of
Jupiter, we ought to ascertain siblings from Mars Ashtakavarga. Whenever Mars travels the sign
having no bindus (after decrease) the local's siblings will bite the dust.

Refrain 91. Increase the Suddha Pinda of Mercury by the quantity of bindus in the second from
Mercury in his own Ashtakavarga (before decrease). Partition the item by 12. The rest of from
Aries addresses the sign, the Dasa and Bhukti of the master of which is good for the
advancement of schooling. Jupiter's travel of this sign likewise leans toward comparative
outcomes.
Refrain 92. Every one of the signs of Mercury as karaka can likewise be considered as occurring
during this period.
Jupiter's Ashtakavarga
Refrain 93. Insights concerning offspring are to be determined from the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter.
The quantity of kids will compare to the quantity of bindus (after decrease) in the sign involved

 by the master of the fifth from Jupiter. The lead and nature of the kids will be like the idea of the
masters who have contributed the bindus.
NOTES
I feel we should accept the quantity of bindus before decrease and not after decrease. It won't be
imaginable to relegate the leftover bindus to the various planets.
Verse 94. Assuming that masters who have contributed bindus (showed in the past section) are
magnified or retrograde, then, at that point, the number ought to be trebled. In the event that they
are in their own sign, or their own Navamsa or in vargottama, the number is to be multiplied.
Assuming they are in weakness or in adversaries' homes, the kids will pass on. Male masters and
rulers involving male houses show male kids. Female masters and rulers in female houses
demonstrate female youngsters.
Refrain 95. The topic of issues can likewise be analyzed from the rulers of the fifth from the
Moon and the Ascendant and from the master of the ninth from Jupiter. The bindus found in the
houses involved by the above rulers (after decrease) give the quantity of kids.
Refrain 96. The above strategies are separated out from Chandrika an explanation of Hora.
There is additionally one more technique for deciding issues from Jupiter's Ashtakavarga.
Refrain 97. Discover the quantity of bindus in the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter in the fifth house
from Jupiter and bar the accompanying: - (a) the adversary of Jupiter; (b) the foe of the ruler of
the fifth from Jupiter; (c) the planet in burning; (d) the planet possessing an antagonistic spot; (e)
planet in weakness; (f) the master of the weakness indication of the ruler of the fifth from Jupiter
and (g) Saturn.
Refrain 98. Total up all the bindus in Jupiter Ashtakavarga (after decrease). Deduct those found
in the signs involved by malefics. The rest of the quantity of kids.
Refrain 99. In the Dwadasamsa outline note the most grounded sign out of the (a) fifth from
Ascendant; (b) fifth from the Moon and (c) the fifth house from Jupiter. The quantity of bindus
found in the most grounded will be the quantity of youngsters.
Verse 100. There will be birth of an issue when Jupiter travels the asterism addressed by the rest
of by duplicating the bindus (before decrease) in the fifth from Jupiter by Jupiter's Suddha Pinda
and isolating the item by 7.
Refrain 101. At the point when Jupiter travels the asterism addressed by the rest of by
duplicating Jupiter's sodya pinda by 7 and separating the item by 27 youngsters will be
conceived. Assuming that the Navamsa involved by Jupiter is more grounded than the Rasi
involved by him, the above remaining portion ought to be counted not from Aswini but rather
from Dhanishta.
Refrain 102. Increase the Sodya Pinda of Jupiter by 4 and gap the item by 12.
The rest of from Aries addresses the period of birth of an issue.
Refrain 103. Increase the Sodya Pinda of Jupiter by 7 and gap the item by 27. The rest of from
the asterism involved by Jupiter (at the hour of birth) gives the asterism of the kid to be

 conceived.

Verse 104. The youngster's introduction to the world ascendant is the sign addressed by the rest
of by isolating by 12 the result of Jupiter's Sodya Pinda and 9,
Verses 105 and 106. Note the ruler of the kakshya involved by Jupiter in the spouse's horoscope
and see if this planet has contributed a bindu in the fifth from Jupiter in his Ashtakavarga in the
wife's horoscope. Whenever Jupiter travels this specific sign, birth of an issue happens.
The long stretch of birth can be known subsequently. Note the Navamsa involved by the ruler of
kakshya (involved by Jupiter) in the spouse's horoscope.
Whenever the Sun travels the Navamsa Rasi of this kakshya master, or its thirds, the issue will
be conceived.
At the point when the Moon travels the sign involved by Gulika, birth of the youngster happens.
The ascendant of the approaching kid will be the Navamsa-Rasi of Gulika or fifth or ninth from
it.
Note the sign involved by the master of the kakshya in which the ruler of the fifth from Jupiter is
set. Whenever Jupiter travels this sign an issue will be conceived. This ought to be loved as
confidential.
Refrain 107. Note the bindus in the fifth sign from Jupiter (after decrease). Include all the bindus
after decrease in the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter. Increase the bindus in the fifth from Jupiter (after
decrease) by the all out bindus (after decrease) in Jupiter's Ashtakavarga. Partition the item by
12.
Verse 108. Note whether the fifth sign from Jupiter has bindus and regardless of whether Jupiter
possesses great spots (Ishta Bhavas). In the event that they are ideal, note the sign involved by
the planet and his Navamsa. Whenever the Moon travels the most grounded of these two signs or
the fifth and the ninth from them, a kid will be conceived.
NOTES
Two elements are to be thought of as here: (a) the ruler of the fifth house from Jupiter, assuming
it has bindus; the master of the ideal spot involved by Jupiter. Take the most grounded and see
where he is set in the Rasi and Navamsa. At the point when the Moon travels the more grounded
of these two, birth happens.

In this outline the fifth from Jupiter has 4 bindus. Thus take the ruler of this sign, viz., Jupiter.
Jupiter himself is well positioned in Scorpio. Take the master of this sign, viz., Mars. Among
Jupiter and Mars, Jupiter is more grounded as he is in the tenth kendra. In the Navamsa he is,
say, in Cancer. Thusly the Navamsa Rasi is Cancer. Among Scorpio and Cancer, the previous is
more grounded. Thusly when the Moon travels Scorpio or its thirds, viz., Pisces or Cancer, the
introduction of the youngster happens.
Verses 109 and 110. Take the Ashtakavarga of Jupiter in the lady's horoscope. Note the bindus

 viewed as in the fifth from Lagna, the Moon (and Jupiter); they address girls. Note the bindus in
the ninth house from the abovementioned; they demonstrate children. In the male's horoscope,
bindus in the fifth address children and the ninth administers little girls.
NOTES
This distinction will be noted cautiously.

Refrain 111. Increase the bindus in the ninth house (in Jupiter's Ashtakavarga) by Jupiter's Sodya
Pinda. This gives the quantity of children. By duplicating the Suddha Pinda by the bindus in the
fifth, we get little girls. The quantity of male and female kids is to be discovered from the bindus
in the fifth house.
Venus Ashtakavarga
Refrains 112 and 113. Consider the signs involved by the masters of the seventh and ninth from
Venus; the signs involved by the rulers of the ninth from the Moon and the ascendant; the sign
involved by the ruler of magnification indication of the ruler of the seventh from the ascendant,
the sign involved by the ruler of weakness of the master of the seventh from the ascendant. In
Venus Ashtakavarga (after decrease), include the bindus in these signs. In the event that the ruler
of the seventh is exceptionally solid, the biggest number, and if frail, least number of bindus
demonstrate the quantity of spouses the man will have.
Verse 114. Duplicate the Sodya Pinda of Venus by the bindus in the seventh from Venus in his
own Ashtakavarga. Partition the item by 27.
Whenever Jupiter travels the asterism addressed by the rest of, takes place.
Refrain 115. Marriage is additionally reasonable when Jupiter travels a sign addressed by the
figure remaining when the result of the Sodya Pinda of Venus and the bindus in the seventh from
Venus is isolated by 12; or in the Dasa of the master of this sign.
Saturn's Ashtakavarga
Refrain 116. Complete the bindus (before decrease) in Saturn's Ashtakavarga from the
ascendant to the sign involved by Saturn; and from the sign involved by Saturn to the ascendant.
These two numbers will demonstrate the age when the local will be assaulted by infection and
different incidents. The all out of the over two figures likewise demonstrates the period of
difficulties. On the off chance that the end or a start of a malefic Dasa corresponds with the age
addressed by tiiese three figures, then, at that point, passing might happen.
Refrain 117. Increase the Sodya Pinda of Saturn by bindus in the eighth from Saturn in his own
Ashtakavarga. Partition the item by 27. At the point when Saturn travels the asterism addressed
by the rest of, the threefold asterisms, passing will happen.
Verse 118. Duplicate the bindus in the sign involved by Jupiter in Saturn's Ashtakavarga by
Saturn's Suddha Pinda. Partition the item by 12. At the point when Jupiter travels the sign
addressed by the rest of will happen. Likewise increase the Sodya Pinda of Saturn by the bindus
in the sign involved by the Sun and gap the item by 12. Whenever the Sun travels the sign

 addressed by the rest of, will happen. Verse 119. Whenever the signs containing less bindus in
Saturn's Ashtakavarga rise consistently, there will be some setback. At the point when the Sun
travels such signs, there will be more noteworthy setbacks or even demise might happen.
Refrain 120. In the event that after decrease (in Saturn's Ashtakavarga) the sign Saturn involves
and the seventh Rasi from it are without bindus, the local will have an unnatural passing in a
singular spot. If anyway cordial planets perspective these signs, relations will be close to him.
Verse 121. Duplicate the Sodya Pinda of Saturn by 7 and separation the item by 27. The rest of
the star grouping the travel of which by Saturn might demonstrate deadly to the local.
Refrain 122. Increase the Suddha Pinda of Saturn by the bindus in the sign involved by Saturn
and gap the item by 27. Add this leftover portion to the rest of in the past verse. Partition the total
by 27. The rest of the asterism the travel of which by Saturn might cause the local's demise.
Refrain 123. Up to this point Ashtakavarga and its belongings have been portrayed exhaustively.
With the assistance of Ashtakavarga, Ashtakavarga Dasas can likewise be determined. This can
be had from other Sastras.

NOTES
With this the creator closes Prasna Marga adding a record of himself and summarizing what he
has depicted in the 32 sections that involve the whole composition.
Verse 124. My (the creator's) local spot is Edakad. My mom's name is "Sri". My dad's name is
Maha Deva. My success is because of my dedication to the Goddess of Edakad. I compose this
work to help my understudies who might learn it without exertion.
Verse 125. In the principal part, I have managed the idea of the Sastra, people who have the
position to decipher the science, characteristics expected in a soothsayer, attributes of Prasna and
Jataka the two of them to be treated in a similar level.
Refrain 126. In the subsequent section, what the crystal gazer needs to follow, what the
examiner needs to do, the sthiti of the examiner, Arudha Lagna, and so forth, have been
itemized.
Refrain 127. In the third section, nimittas have been point by point. In the fourth section, Prasna
Chakra is attracted up as indicated by Ashtamangala Prasna.
Refrain 128. In the fifth section, the estimations with respect to Lagna Sphuta and others are
given. In the sixth, Sutra, Trisphuta, and so on, and their belongings are depicted. In the seventh
section assessment through Ashtamangala is treated at full length. In the eighth, the impacts of
Arudha and Lagna are given.
Refrain 129. In the ninth section, the conversation of life span through Prasna and Jataka is
directed. In the tenth section, demise causing periods as founded on Prasna and Horoscopy are
evaluated.

 Refrain 130. In the eleventh section, signs and periods demonstrating passing are analyzed
through both Prasna and Horoscopy.
Refrain 131. In the twelfth, infections and how they are caused is the topic. In the thirteenth
when sickness starts and when it closures and fellow themes are clarified.

Verse 132. In the fourteenth part, how Bhavas are to be inspected is talked about. In the
fifteenth, the subject is favor or disgrace of divine beings and others, and how to satisfy them.
Refrain 133. In the sixteenth, certain Lakshanas are inspected. In the seventeenth and
eighteenth, inquiries bearing separately on marriage and youngsters have been examined. In the
nineteenth, the possibilities of having kids as perused from horoscopy have been totally gone
through.
Verse 134. In the twentieth, the subject is the assessment of the seventh house. In the 21st,
arrangement of the couple is inspected. In the 22nd, Gochara impacts are given. In the 23rd, the
theme is Karma Vipaka.
Verse 135. In the 24th, the themes are inquiries on rulers, divinities, war and hunting. In the
25th, signs for precipitation have been given. The 26th arrangements with wells.
Refrain 136. In the 27th, inquiries bearing on food, gain and whereabouts of an explorer have
been taken up. Sex and sexual association have been itemized in the 28th part. In the 29th,
moksha, and in the 30th, obscure horoscopes have been itemized.
Refrain 137. Dreams, how they are caused and their belongings are the topic of the 31st section.
What's more in the 32nd, Ashtakavarga has been point by point.
Verse 138. Allow the people who to have uncalled for thoughts avoid this book, similarly as
some Saivites being an opponent party avoid Vaishnavites.
NOTES
Some Saivites, it appears, being an opponent party to Vaishnavites were discrediting the worth of
this book around then. The creator says let this composition be of no utilization to them. It
appears to be in the eastern areas there was a soothsayer named 'Easwara' and that he was talking
low of this book. What the writer says is that his opponents' devotees need not be benefited by
this book.
Verse 139. All that contained in this composition depends on Sastraic authority. Accordingly
concentrate on what is contained in this cautiously and have confidence in the worth of the
lessons contained in that and your words won't ever turn bogus.
Verse 140. As mentioned by my supporters, I arranged this book with care. The initial segment
contains 16 sections, and the subsequent part contains another 16 sections. Consequently in all in
32 parts, the composition is finished.