PRASHNA MARG IN ASTROLOGY
PART-1
BY VIJAY DUBEY

 Contents

Vivah Prasanna (Marriage)
Sanihati Prasanna (Children)
Death of mother and father and death of child in womb and whether father
Rasi Hora Drekkana Navamsa Dvadasamsa Trisansa
Issues according to birth horoscope
Some special yogas of Putrasthan
Lord of navamsa lord of 5th house and lord of navamsa
7th house according to birth horoscope
Marriage compatibility
Countable
Gotranukulya (agreement of gotras)
Vihanganakulyam
Perforation defect
Geostationary
Ashtakvarga
Chittanukulya
Other things
Effects of transit
Diseases: Causes and Treatment
Rajayakshma (consumption)
capacity (capacity)
leprosy (leprosy)
Visarpa (Serpis)
diarrhea (dysentery)
Grahani (facial disease)
Arsa disease (hemorrhoids)
Eye disease (eye disease)
Nakandya (Partial Blindness)

 Kama Roga (ear disease)
Jihwa Roga (Linguistic Disease)
Gout
Sula (stomach ache problem)
Gulma (spleen disease)
Prameha:
Mahodara (Dropsy)
Fistula
madness
Kantha Roga (throat disease)
Cirrhosis (headache)
Teardrop:
Apsamara (epilepsy)
Mookathwa and Maniya (stupidity and madness)
Fever
Daha (thirst)
Ulcer disease
blisters on hands feet
childless
Anorexia
Mooktwa (stupid)
Kamilla (blindness)
Intestinal enlargement (intestinal discomfort)

 Vivah Prasanna (Marriage)
Verse 1. I shall now consider the question of marriage after describing the
matters relating to longevity. This order is to be followed.
notes
The first part of this book describes in detail the various methods of
estimating longevity. The author now raises the question of marriage and
deals with it in great detail.
Verse 2. An astrologer should first check the longevity of the married
couple on the basis of their respective horoscopes. Then other details of
their future life like children, etc should be studied thoroughly. Only then
can marriage be taken to Prasanna. After satisfying himself that there is
complete consent, he may recommend a marriage alliance made primarily
for the offspring that satisfy the single fathers. This is the opinion of
Prasanna Sangha.
notes
It was a belief among the ancients that the main purpose of marriage was to
produce children, so that the soul of the departed would rest in peace. Of
course modern views differ, but the birth of children is an important aspect
of marriage.
Verse 3. Marriage contracts can be made only after careful examination of
the life of the couple as read from Vivah Prasanna. So in his Madhavi he
says Brihaspati and Madhav.
Notes
Horror charts should form the basis for an in-depth understanding of the
possible signs in the lives of the bride and groom. Then comes the question
of acceptance or rejection for the match alone.
Madhaviyam is a valuable treatise mostly dealing with Muhurta or electoral
astrology. The treatment of the 'marriage' issue has been quite widespread.
This book can be of immense practical interest to all the students of
astrology. It is available only in Sanskrit. It deals with difficult problems in

 Muhurta such as the relative importance of tithi (lunar day), nakshatra
(nakshatra), etc., and how, under particular planetary configurations, certain
doshas can be overlooked.
Vidya Madhaviyam has a commentary by the author's son Vishnu and
including the commentary, the book contains about fifteen thousand texts.
The writer Madhava is said to have lived under the patronage of the
Vijayanagara king Bukka about 600 years ago.
Verse 4. The seeker must first approach the astrologer with reverence and
then
Gently pronounce the names and constellations of the desired bride and
groom, without repeating them.
Verse 5. The astrologer should then check the future of the couple on the
basis of Prasanna Kundli. The presence of auspicious planets in the seventh
house is good.
notes
It is to be noted that no planet should be in the 7th house at the time of
marriage, while benefics in the 7th are the indicators of good in the
horoscope affecting the marriage.
Verse 6. Suppose a person wants to ask a question regarding marriage. The
correct procedure should be as follows:
Verse 7. "Can this girl (name and nakshatra given) if attached to this person
(name and nakshatra added), expect to agree and prosper with long marital
relations and children?" This is the form in which the query is to be framed.
Verse 8. Sage Brihaspati is of the opinion that the names and constellations
of both the bride and the groom should be mentioned. The most important
of these is that of the bride. A careful reading of the lagna reveals the life of
the bride, while the seventh house gives details about the groom.
Shlok 9. In this way, the nature, life history, etc. of the bride can be
estimated from the lagna and the story of the groom can be guessed from
the 7th.

 Shlok 10. If the Sun is debilitated or in the enemy sign and does not aspect
the Lagna or Arudha, then the bride will have no father. Similarly, if the
Moon is situated in the same way, then it is motherless.
notes
Here the power of the Sun is to be noted. If he is strong and does not keep
an eye on the lagna, the girl's father does not take care of him. Both Arudha
and Lagna should be devoid of his vision. Thus the position of brothers can
be ascertained from Mars; About the uncle of Mercury etc., the author has
given the above details as described in the ritual method.
Shlok 11. If there is no sight of Sun in the seventh house from the ascendant
or Arudha, which is debilitated or the enemy is in the house, then the father
of the groom will not be alive. A similarly positioned Moon indicates that
the mother will not survive. Similarly, the position of brothers can be
ascertained from Mars etc.
notes
Let us take an example (Chart 1) where the proposed match is assigned to
the astrologer at 12 IST. is brought on. On 3-7-1982 at 13° N, 77° East 35.
The author says that the lagna or arudha should be taken into account. How
is Arudha determined? This, strictly speaking, should be determined
according to the method outlined in Chapter 2, verses 7 to 11 (Part 1),
which we will briefly repeat here.
"Arudha Prasanna or Hori is a very important factor in astrology..." The 12
zodiac signs are assigned to 8 directions and Arudha is determined
according to the direction the querent faces at the time of consultation.
There seems to be a bottleneck in this method in modern times. Today's
astrologer has his furniture, especially his writing desk, arranged in a
special way, which remains the same day after day. Naturally on any given
day any inquisitor should face the astrologer in the same direction. This
means that the sign representing this direction is always Arudha, whoever it
is, and whenever it is. Despite this, of course, this method is quite effective
because the position of the planets with respect to Arudha is constantly

 changing. The method can be confirmed only by experimenting with a large
number of questions.
Another method suggested seems more feasible is to draw a circle and
divide into 8 parts where each cardinal point becomes 45°.
Each of the common signs gets 45° while the other marks only get 22 1/2°.
The querent is asked to place a piece of gold at any point called an arudha.
For example in Figure 1, if the querent places the coin between East and
South-East, Arudha will be Taurus. According to the first method the
direction he faces will be Arudha. If he is standing facing North-East, then
Arudha will be of Pisces. Even if the astrologer's desk faces south-east and
the chair opposite Arudha has the same north-west sign Sagittarius every
time, it will work quite well for all the querents.
Instead of a gold coin (gold representing the Sun, the center of our solar
system), a gold object such as a ring, cufflinks, chain, bangle, pendant
would be in pretty much order at the present time.
Going back to chart 1, Ascendant is Virgo, Sun is in 10th position with
Rahu. Arudha, as it was facing North-West, belongs to Sagittarius sign. Sun
is aspecting Arudha but she is not in enemy or weak sign. On the other hand
it is aspected by Jupiter which shows that the girl's father is alive.
Moon is debilitated and does not see Lagna or Arudha. Unfortunately the
girl lost her mother a few years back. The fourth sign is suffering enough
even if the Venus-Mercury conjunction casts an eye on the Moon.
There are two sins in marriage. Ascendant and seventh house are in
unfavorable position with respect to each other. The Moon is in the
Apoclima (third, sixth, ninth or twelfth), but is not benefically applied to
Jupiter or Mercury. This indicates that it is unlikely that the marriage will
take place and even if for the sake of argument, the couple may quarrel
endlessly.
In actual practice, it is found that even if this conjunction happens, Jupiter's
vision can negate the bad effects.

 Verse 12. Whatever has been elaborated earlier should be considered
carefully. And if they are found favourable, then the person is blessed with
good fortune, children and marriage. Otherwise the results will be adverse.
Notes
The author suggests that while studying the Prasanna chart, due attention
should be paid to the signs suggested in the earlier chapters. The author has
probably taken into account Chapter II which deals with some of the
allusions affecting time, place etc. If the signs are also good, then marriage
takes place and the person enjoys happiness and wealth.
Shlok 13. In Adhyay 2 some reasons are given and they are especially
useful in questions related to marriage. They can be used efficiently in this
context.
Shloka 14. From the first part of Shloka "Kujendu", the obstacles regarding
menstruation and marriage etc. should be explored. The possibility of
marriage etc. should be explored from the second part.
Notes
Varaha Mihira gives details about menstruation in women in his Brihat
Jataka, Chapter 4, which begins with the verse 'Kujendu ke prathi maas
marthavam...'. Some of the signs that will bring a happy married life are
given. In Vivah Muhurta, if Mars is in the 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th house,
then the marriage has to be postponed or stopped due to the bride's monthly
menstruation (menstruation). If he is in even signs in the second, fourth,
sixth, eighth, tenth and twelfth from the ascendant, then the marriage will
not take place for the same reason. If the Moon is situated in the 2nd, 4th,
5th, 7th, 9th and 12th (Anupachaya Rashi) then the marriage will take place
without any accident. Similarly, if it is in the 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th
house from the ascendant, then there will be no serious obstruction. If
Moon is aspected by Mars then it transits in 2nd, 5th and 6th house,
monthly is monthly.

 When the Moon is aspected by Jupiter, then it occurs in other houses, there
is a sexual relationship between husband and wife. In the question related to
the birth of a child (for more details), the monthly period can be determined
keeping in mind the yoga-sphut of Moon and Mars. Conception can be
calculated on the basis of sum—Athonithastha; The arrival of the moon can
be done from the position of love. Upaithe springy delivery time. Thus we
see that this verse is rich in meaning and has to be applied carefully in the
context. It is said that this verse also indicates some remedial measures to
be taken for a happy ending of marriage in the form of worship of Sita,
Rama, Krishna, Rukmini etc.
Verse 15. If afflicted Moon is in even sign with happy Lagna or Arudha,
then marriage will not take place and the question will be kept during the
period of diminishing moon. The Moon in the eighth house also indicates
any obstacle in marriage.
Note The above combinations are given in Prasanna collection.
Verse 16. If the seeker touches his hand, chest or head, marriage will take
place. If he touches his feet, knees and knee caps, then the marriage will be
delayed. If he touches her left hand, her back, her back waist, the marriage
will not take place. If the lord of ascendant and seventh lord or lord of lagna
and Venus change houses, or live in friendly places, or are of exalted, or see
each other, then marriage will take place.
Notes
Here Arudha and the lord of the seventh from Arudha can also be taken into
account for the purposes of prophecies. It may be noted that the parts of the
body to be touched for favorable results are the sensual areas especially
used by young couples. Those that are not used are discarded.
Shlok 17. If the sinful sins are put down in the eighth house or are kept in
the eighth house, then the marriage will not take place due to one reason or
the other. If sin is in the 6th house, then marriage is not done due to disease
in the couple. This nature can also be the reason for the breakdown of
marriage relations due to quarrels between relatives. If animals, birds or

 snakes are found in the act of cohabitation during the question hour, then
the character of the girl will be doubtful.
Notes
This verse enables us to predict on the basis of question hour whether the
marriage talks will be fruitful or not.
(a) for the failure of negotiations due to any reason or other malefic planets
to be in the eighth, debilitated or enemy sign from the malefic aspect; 6th
are, as noted above, (c) the temperament described in Uses the word Jarini
(adulterant) - if at the time of question, animals, birds or serpents are found
in copulation.
Shlok 18. In the 8th year after marriage, both husband and wife will die if
Moon, along with evil planets, is in the 8th or 6th house from the lagna. If
Moon is in 6th or 8th house and at the same time Mars is in 6th or 8th house
from Moon, then in the ninth year of marriage, the husband and wife die
without any dispute. If Moon and Mars are in the seventh house, the couple
will die in the 7th month of marriage.
Notes
The couple will die in the 8th year if the afflicted Moon is in the 6th or 8th
house from the ascendant or Arudha ascendant. Disaster occurs in the 9th
year, if Mars is in the sixth or eighth position from the Moon in addition to
the yogas mentioned now. If both Moon and Mars are in the seventh house,
then the couple will die in the 7th month. Here whenever the lagna is
mentioned, the Arudha lagna is also implied.
Shlok 19. If the lord of Yama Shukra (...) or the tenth house from Arudha is
in the sixth, eighth or twelfth house or Shukra is in the sixth, eighth or
twelfth house from Yama Shukra, then marriage will not take place.
Happens at the appointed time. If Rahu or Ketu or Gulika, the lord of the
ascendant, Yama Shukra and the yoga formed by connecting the longitudes
of Shukra, occupy or aspect the sphuta, then the married couple will not
have any happiness after marriage.

 Notes
The Lagna Yama rising on 22, 18, 14, 10, 6, 2 and 26 valleys respectively
after sunrise on Sunday to Saturday gives the position of Venus. Yama
Shukra is said to rise on different weekdays at the time given above.
The yogic flute mentioned in this verse is the point obtained by joining the
lord of the ascendant, Yama Shukra, and the longitudes of Venus.
Determination of Yama Shukra: Example: Determination of Yama Shukra
on 3-7-1982 at 12 o'clock in Bangalore. IST Weekdays - Saturday Sunrise 5.55 am LMT
Yama Shukra rises at 26 o'clock. After sunrise on Saturday, that is, at 10
o'clock. 24m after sunrise. Sunrise + 10 hours. 24m - 16 hours 19m.
Wedding at 16. 19m LMT = 19° 51' Scorpio therefore Yama Venus 19° 51'
Scorpio lagna at 12 o'clock. IST = 13° 47' Virgo Longitude of Venus 17° 02'
Taurus.
Yoga Sphuta = 229° 51' + 133° 47' + 37° 02' = 40° 40' or 10° 40' Taurus.
For example applying this shloka, there should not be 6th, 8th or 12th
position from Arudha for Scorpio marriage. Here it is 12th from Arudha in
Sagittarius.
Sun, the tenth lord from Yama Shukra (Scorpio), should also not take any
contamination from it. Here Sun is in the eighth house from Yama Venus, a
factor against getting married again.
Rahu, Ketu or Gulik in Sphut Yoga do not give happiness in marriage. The
nodes do not suffer it but most of the factors are against the happy marriage.
Verse 20. Remarriage takes place under the following signs: the appearance
of a man with two women at the time of Prasanna, the sudden appearance of
husband and wife at the age of a bull and a cow at the time, the completion
of the cycle worship not one but two heard from afar, by persons; And the
presence of all the animals that indulge in the majority union.
Shlok 21. At the time of Prasanna, red flowers or scratches on the body
with fingers obstructs the menstrual cycle of the bride. The cry of elephants
and buffaloes, the appearance of red flowers and the placement of a piece of

 gold either in the center (Padma) or in the lines in the chakra indicate the
dissolution of the marriage.
Verse 22. The separation of two persons hitherto hand in hand, seeing a
dead body or seeing a person die, and hearing words of dispute or quarrel
indicates the breakdown of marriage. Below are some of the signs that
indicate a happy union.
Notes
Verses 20, 21 and 22 contain signs or indicative signs or signs that indicate
that marriages do not take place. The verses are clear and need no
explanation.
Shlok 23. If merchants sell clothes during Prasanna, or any person
is seen wearing unwashed clothes and holding a useless cloth in his hand;
Or any living being is seen indulging in sexual intercourse, the marriage
will take place immediately. Seeing a man digging the ground or chopping
wood indicates that the woman in question is bad.
Verse 24. If at the time of Prasanna it is seen that the dress of a person is
falling from his body, then it can be inferred that the girl is not pure. The
same can be said if a girl's thong-coat falls off her body.
Verse 25. If any of the following omen is seen at the time of Prasanna, the
marriage will take place soon: (a) Merchants seem to be willing to sell
metal utensils other than brass kettles; (b) a mirror made of brass or a
thumb flower, or articles made of silver—these being seen at that time; (c)
the person with the sacred thread comes clean after the oil-bath; and (d) any
person who touches his eyes with his hands.
Verse 26. If two things appear to be linked or closely linked at the time of
question, then early marriage is indicated; a married couple arrives on time
or appears far away; A man with woolen cords is seen on the hands and
feet; a songwriter either sings or otherwise; Or at that time some sweet
smelling ointment in the form of sandalwood appears.

 Notes
Shlokas 20 to 26 specifically deal with nimittas or symbolic signs or signs,
on the basis of which one can predict whether the proposed marriage will
take place or not. The list of these reasons is important. How keen observers
our ancient sages were, it is evident when we consider that there is nothing
in nature left for coincidence or accident and that synchronicity is the basis
of events. For example, seeing a couple shaking hands indicates success.
But such 'omen' cannot influence the event. But an event and a related omen
can be synchronous events as explained by Carl Jung.
Shlok 27. If the lord of Venus and the seventh house is in Upadhyay, then
the couple will be happy after marriage and give birth to children.
Notes
The same principle can be extended to make predictions about issues etc, as
follows: If Jupiter and the lord of the 5th house are in Upadhyaya, there will
be great prosperity after the birth of the child. If Mars and the lord of the
third house are in the 3rd, 6th or 11th house, then happiness is attained after
the birth of the brother. Thus the karaka and the various gods have to be
considered. The above combinations are according to Prasanna Gems.
Verse 28. If strong Moon and Venus are in even signs and look at Navamsa
and Lagna, then the native is able to marry the girl soon.
Notes
This combination applies to both birth and horror horoscopes.
Shlok 29. If the Lagna woman is in Drakana and the same Navamsha is
aspected by Moon and Venus, then marriage will happen soon.
Note This yoga can be usefully applied to the male chart.
Shlok 30. Benefit in Kendras and Trikonas and 7th house, owned and seen
by the lord, brings a beautiful bride to the person. If the seventh house is of
a sinner, then the wife is not beautiful.
Notes

 This yoga can also be used in reading the seventh house of a man's
horoscope. The above is from Prasanna Collection.
Shlok 31. If the Moon is aspected from an auspicious house, then it should
be in the 3rd, 6th, 7th, 10th or 11th house from the Lagna (or Arudha); Or
Venus and Moon are in the Lagna or 7th house, the Ascendant should be
Gemini or Virgo or Libra or Aquarius; Or if Mercury, Venus and Jupiter are
in the quadrant or seventh house, then the marriage takes place quickly.
Verse 32. If the Ascendant, 5th, 8th, and 9th in a scary horoscope are
associated with or aspected by their respective lords and are devoid of
inauspicious aspects or associations, it will be good for the couple only after
marriage. Otherwise a wise man should not celebrate marriage. If the
Ascendant and Moon are in an auspicious Navamsa, then auspicious results
are obtained. If these sins are in the Navamsha of the planets, then death
can also occur.
Notes
If the Ascendant, 5th, 7, 8th and 9th houses are free from the troubles of
bad planets at the time of question, but are associated with or aspecting
their respective lords or auspicious planets, then the married couple will be
happy. Marriage. If neither of these is located, marriage will only bring evil.
Therefore it should not be recommended. If Lagna and Moon are in
Navamsha, then auspicious results are obtained. However, if they are
captured by the evil Navams, then only evil will happen.
In chart 1 there is Mars and Saturn in the ascendant which is also in 7th
position. Mars and Jupiter are in the eighth house. There is no aspect of any
planet on 5th house whereas 9th house is related to Mercury and Venus. The
minus points are more in the evidence.
In Navamsa, the ascendant Taurus is in an auspicious sign, but the Moon is
in an inauspicious sign. Also, Navamsa can be referred to only when the
Rasi is satisfactory. Here since the Rasi chart itself does not ensure
happiness, Navamsa can be postponed.
Verse 33. The married couple will die if the sinner is debilitated or in
unfriendly signs in the 1st, 7th and 8th.

 Notes
According to Jupiter, weak sinners should be in Lagna, seventh or
8th; Or this house should be an unfriendly place for sinners in a happy
horoscope. The result would be that the husband and wife would die.
Potential Duration Mentioned above are the Dasha and Bhukti of the sin
planets.
Verse 34. A malefic planet in the debilitated 5th house, aspected by enemy
planets, indicates that the woman is of dubious character or her children
will die.
Notes
If the fifth house is afflicted by the presence of a debilitating planet or the
aspect of an enemy planet, then the wife is said to be ill-mannered or her
children die. The author seems somewhat unclear. Which outcome - the
immorality of a woman or the death of her children - would be better? The
interpretation is left to the intellect of the astrologer. We feel that if the fifth
house is afflicted as per the shloka, but Venus is clean and well disposed,
then no reflection can be cast on the character of the woman. One must be
very careful in matters of judging a woman's chastity or otherwise.
Verse 35. If the fifth house is afflicted by malefic planets, then the woman
will not have any children. If all babies are born, they will die. If these
malefic planets are in weak or inauspicious signs, the mother kills her
children.
Notes
A mother must be really hard hearted and cruel to kill her children. Of
course there are some mothers who kill their children for various reasons.
Poverty may be one reason for this. And the questionable character - a
mother having an extramarital affair - can make the mother resort to the
crime of infanticide. The same combination is expected to result in either
the death of the children or the killing of the children by the mother. Any

 combination of Moon's torment and adultery must be carefully identified in
order to judge the latter's guilt.
The above two verses are from the ritual method.
Verse 36. If the lord of the seventh house is strong then the native will be
married in a good and wealthy family. If the lord of the seventh house is
weak or in a debilitated or enemy house, then he will marry an ugly looking
wife from a poor and bad family.
Notes
According to this shloka we can say that the person gets a beautiful and
good wife and maybe also beautiful gifts if the lord of 7th house is well
established and strong: otherwise the wife will not look good, she is from a
bad family and cannot expect any material gain. In today's time when taking
dowry is illegal, then astrological interpretation should be done very
efficiently.
Shlok 37. If female planets are aspecting the Lagna in a friend's zodiac,
which should be a male sign, then the wife will love her husband.
Otherwise the result will be opposite.
Notes
This shloka refers to the 'Stree-Grahas' or female planets and they are the
Moon and Venus. They should live in friendly signs and keep an eye on the
lagna which should be a male sign. On this coincidence, the husband gets a
loving wife. Here a female planet (Venus or Moon) can also cause yoga.
Let's say Sagittarius is the Ascendant and Venus views it from Gemini,
which is a friendly sign. Husband gets a loving wife. Applying this in a
male horoscope, if a malefic planet (Sun, Mars or Jupiter) is in a friendly
sign and the lagna has to be an even sign, then the husband will love the
wife.
All such combinations should be done skillfully and not interpreted literally
to arrive at the correct conclusion.
Verse 38. The effects of Trisamsa are explained by Varahamihira in the
chapter on Horoscope of Women. These should also be suitably applied to

 the Prasanna charts related to marriage.
Notes
The author of this work has attached so much importance to the Brihat
Jataka of Varahamihira that Mihir is often quoted and referred to with
respect.
In the chapter "Women's Horoscope", the great Mihira discusses the
importance of Trisans in women's horoscopes, especially in assessing their
character. Late Prof. B. It is discussed in detail in Suryanarayana Rao's book
Female Horoscopy. It is also recommended to read this book carefully.
Shlok 39. If at the time of question a girl of marriageable nature appears, or
a story is told about her, the bride's colour, shape, demeanor, etc., will be
the same as the girl has seen or heard. The location of the bride can be
ascertained from the strength of the lord of the lagna and arudha. If the girl's
native Moon Prasanna is the same as Arudha lagna in the horoscope, then
the couple will live long and give birth to children.
Notes
At the time of Prasanna, it may happen that a marriageable girl can be seen
or a girl's voice can be heard. The bride will be what you see or hear in
colour, shape and demeanor. The bride's place can be known from Arudha
and the lord of the lagna, whichever is stronger. The girl's rasi or moon sign
should be that of Arudha. If such a girl is selected then the married couple
will be long and happy. They will have prosperous children.
Verse 40. The timing of marriage is known as: When the Moon crosses the
Dwadsansa Rasi of the Moon, or its 5th or 9th or Chandrabhilasha Rasi, or
the Navamsa Rasi of the 7th lord.
Notes
When Prasanna chart indicates marriage, we can predict that marriage will
take place at the time of Moon's transit
(a) the mark indicated by his own dwelfth position;

 (b) 5th or 9th of this; or (c) Chandrabhilasha sign – this is explained in the
next verse – or (d) the lord of the 7th Navamsa Rasi.
For example let's say the lagna is Sagittarius, and the Moon is 21° Taurus
and Mercury is 15° Gemini, which means that the Moon is in Capricorn.
The lord of seventh Mercury is in Aquarius Navamsa. If Prasanna chart
shows marriage, it can be (a) when Moon transits in Capricorn; or (b)
Taurus or Libra; or (c) the moon sign; or (d) Aquarius. Here as always the
experience and intuition of the astrologer should help him to decide which
of these four options is good.
Verse 41. Divide the Moon's longitude (in minutes) by 800. Call the
remainder (A). Multiply (a) by 3. Divide the product by 200 - the quotient
is the moon sign. The remainder is multiplied by 30 and divided by 200 to
get the numerator. Multiply again by (a) by
9. Divide the product by 200. The quotient represents the Chandravel
longitude.
Notes
Chandrabhilasha sign and Chandravela sign are two different factors.
Example: Chart 3: 8-30 PM. in Bangalore on 24-5-1984.
Moon = 332° 01' in Rasi.
When Moon transits from Pisces Rasi (Dvadasamsa) Rasi, or 5th (Cancer)
or 9th (Scorpio) Pisces, marriage can take place. It can also happen when it
transits in Leo sign in Navamsa in the possession of 7th lord Mercury.
Determination of Moon Sign:
Longitude of the Moon - 332° 01' = 19921'
(i) 19921/800 = 24 and remainder 721 a = 721
(ii) a x 3 = 721 x 3 = 2163
(iii) 2163/200 = 10.815 = 10s 24'45 deg.
(iv) Moon sign - Aquarius 24.45 degrees. Determination of Chandravel
sign: (i) a x 9 = 721 x 9 = 6489 (ii) 6489/200 = 32.445 = 32s 66.75 degree =
34s 6.75 degree

 Removing the multiple of 12 we get 10s 6.75 degree Chandravel =
Aquarius 6.75 degree.
Shlok 42. In this way, after studying Prasanna Kundali and knowing the
auspicious and inauspicious nature of Shakunas, if the Muhurta is selected
for marriage, then everything will be fine.

 Sanihati Prasanna (Children)
Verse 1. In this chapter I will describe the question related to the birth of
children.
All questions should be done in auspicious time.
Notes
Since timing plays an important role in shaping the sequence of actions, the
author suggests that it is essential that questions be placed in auspicious
moments.
Verse 2. A woman living with her husband in an auspicious time will soon
have a child. All auspicious work should be done in auspicious time only.
Similarly, all questions regarding marriage, money, cohabitation etc should
be done at a chosen time when there is a beneficial settlement of lagna and
planets.
Verse 3. A question regarding progeny should be made as follows: "Will
this person be born in the name of... and the constellation... will a son be
born to a woman of this name and born"
Verse 4. A santathi prasanna (interrogation of children) applies to both
husband and wife. Lagna signifies the matters related to the husband and
Arudha lagna tells everything about the wife. This is the opinion of
Prasanna Sangha.
Verse 5. If both the lord of Arudha and the 9th of them are in combustion,
then there is something wrong with the 'garbha' (region) of the wife; In
which case the man has to remarry for progeny if both the lord of the
ascendant and the 5th of that are in combustion, then there is some trouble
in the seed (seed) of the husband, in such a situation worship is done to
Vishnu and You should take the help of Brahmins.
Notes

 If it is found that the field and seed are infested, one can safely predict that
the couple will have no children. It should be noted that in a female
horoscope, the 9th house is the place of children, whereas in a male
horoscope the 5th house governs children.
Verse 6. When the Moon is in Anachaya from Arudha and Anachaya from
Lagna; When Arudha is in female sign while Lagna is in male sign; When
the fire-ghost rises in the ascendant; And when the tree, ruled by the
constellation of Jupiter, does not produce any fruit at the time of Prasanna,
it is difficult to predict that there will be problems.
Notes
Prasanna chart does not indicate the birth of children under the following
combinations:
(1) Moon is situated in 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th house from Arudha Lagna
and in 2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 12th house from Lagna.
(2) Arudha lagna is a female sign and Prasanna lagna is a masculine sign.
(3) Agnibhuta rises in the ascendant.
(4) The tree ruled by the Nakshatra occupied by Jupiter is not giving fruit at
the time of question.
The various elements, such as fire, etc., are explained in Chapter 14 of the
first part, which the reader can refer to for details.
The above verse is of Santana Deepika.
Verse 7. Combinations of childlessness, adoption, death of children, birth of
few children, and many issues etc. are now dealt with.
Shlok 8. If the lord of the ascendant Jupiter and the lords of 5 and 7 are all
weak, then the questioner will not have any children.
Shlok 9. If the sins are in the fifth house and the lord of the fifth house is in
the middle of the sin planets and is devoid of auspicious vision, then
childlessness will result.
Notes

 According to another version the lord of the 5th should be low (neechha
samsthita): Arudha is the 9th from the ascendant and the 5th from the lagna
is the house of issues.
Verse 10. If malefic planets from Ascendant, Moon and Jupiter are in the
fifth house and there is no auspicious effect on them, then the result of
Anapatya Yoga is obtained.
Shlok 11. If Mercury or Shani is in the fifth house and it is aspected by or
related to Shani and Gulik, then the person will have to go for adoption.
Shlok 12. The native will not have any natural problem, but if a strong
benefic planet is in the fifth house without the aspect of the fifth house lord,
then it will have to be adopted.
Verse 13. If there is a Jupiter in Pisces or Capricorn in the fifth house, then
the person suffers the loss of a child. If there is a Jupiter in Cancer in the
fifth house, then he will have many children, according to the sages.
Notes
Verses 5 to 13 list the combinations of birth of children, death of children,
childlessness (or anapat yoga) and adoption. The verses are clear and no
further examples are needed.
Verse 5 mentions Bija and Kshetra. This topic is covered in detail in my
book How to Judge a Horoscope Volume I, which interested readers can
refer to. When Bija is afflicted, the husband, despite the normal functions of
the reproductive system, lacks the subtle energy in the sperm to impregnate
the wife. when the area is
There is a lack of subtle energy to conceive even if the victim, wife's
pregnancy etc. is normal. Careful study of seeds and field theory is very
essential.
While there is a general saying that Jupiter, placed in the house of children,
as the cause of children, destroys the house, the author seems to extend that

 theory further, when he says, on the authority of the ancient sages, That
Jupiter is equal in 5th Capricorn or Pisces natives feel sad due to the death
of a child. If Pisces is to be 5th, then the Ascendant should be Scorpio. If
Jupiter is in the fifth house, then his functions as a karaka and a lord
become equal. He will also look at the marriage. Yet the result is extremely
unfavourable. Then when someone is born in Pisces and has Jupiter in the
5th (Cancer) he has many daughters. If seen from above, this yoga can be
considered impossible. But the author says that this is the opinion of the
sages. These combinations should be balanced in the light of other
favorable or unfavorable factors affecting the children's home.
Shlok 14. If the debilitated lord of the 5th house is in the eighth house,
which is an enemy sign devoid of auspicious houses and the lord of the 8th
house is in the 5th house, then there is a loss of children.
Shlok 15. If Jupiter is in the midst of malefic planets and the fifth lord is
weak, without looking at anyone or associated with profit, then there will be
loss of children.
Notes
In the above verses, the troubles of Panchmesh and Jupiter are considered
for the loss of children. Similarly, if the fifth house is in the middle of sins
and is devoid of auspicious aspects and the fifth lord is also subject to
sufferings, then there is a loss of children.
Shlok 16. According to the experts of astrology, if the lord of the fifth house
is debilitated, is in an enemy place or is set, then there is a loss of children.
or is associated with the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house; Or if the lord of
the 5th house is situated in the 5th house then there is no profit.
Shlok 17. If the lord of the 5th house is strong, is in the company of the lord
of the ascendant or has vision on him and the fifth house is free from
troubles, then the person has a child.
Shlok 18. If Mars is in the fifth house which is Aries, Leo, Scorpio or
Pisces and on which Jupiter has auspicious sight, then a child will be born.
Notes

 The original word used is putravaptim which simply means, a son will be
born.
But I have interpreted the term generically to indicate children in general.
Shlok 19. If the fifth house is covered in the middle and is aspected by
auspicious houses or if there is a conjunction or aspect with the lord of the
fifth house, then a child is born.
Verse 20. If the strong lord of the 5th house is in a house other than the 6th,
8th or 12th house and there is a aspect or conjunction of an auspicious
planet, then the birth of a child can be predicted.
Shlok 21. If the strong lord of the 5th house is in the 5th or 7th house and
without any aspect or combination of sin, then issues will arise.
Verse 22. If strong Jupiter is in Lagna or 5th or 7th house and unaffected by
sinners, children will be born.
Notes
Almost all the above shlokas emphasize the benefic nature of Jupiter, the
lord of 5th, 5th notice and ensure the birth of children, Jupiter can be
considered strong in Pisces, Cancer and Sagittarius. He gets Digbal in the
marriage. But in Shlok 21, the seventh house along with the ascendant and
the fifth house is also mentioned to ensure the birth of a child.
Shlok 23. If the lord of the 5th house is strong or in an auspicious house,
then a child is born.
Shlok 24. Ancient masters believe that if Venus, Jupiter and Mercury and
the lord of the 5th house have conjunction or vision of the 5th house, many
children will be born. The number of children depends on the strength of
the lord of the 5th house.
Shlok 25. Scholars say that if the lord of the 5th house is exalted, is in the
odd Navamsha, aspected by auspicious planets and the fifth house is free
from afflictions, then many issues will arise.

 Verse 26. If the lords of fifth house Sun, Mars and Jupiter are in odd signs
and navams, then a large number of sons will be born. If the lord of the fifth
house is strong, then the sons are of good nature.
Notes
Undoubtedly the Sun, Jupiter and Mars must be in contrasting signs. But his
sixth, eighth and twelfth occupation is not desirable. When the lord of the
fifth house is strong, it gives birth to a son or a son with the best qualities of
affection, obedience and sense of duty towards the parents.
Verse 27. If Moon and Venus, the lord of the fifth house, join in an even
zodiac and an even navamsha, then a large number of daughters will be
born.
Verse 28. If the Moon is Hora of the Ascendant and the astrologer's breath
flows through the left nostril; If the Ascendant is in the Hora of the Sun and
the breath flows from the right side, then there will be trouble.
Notes
If the Ascendant is in the Hora of the Moon and the astrologer is breathing
at that time
A daughter will be born from the left nostril. If the Ascendant falls in the
Hora of the Sun and the breath flows through the right nostril, a son is born.
We quote the following from the second edition of MSS.
If the Ascendant is in the Hora of Surya (Sun), breathing is through the
right nostril and Arudha and Lagna are in opposite signs, then problems will
not arise.
Lagna Moon is in Hora. The breath passes through the right side. Moon,
Lagna and Arudha are in Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio. There won't be
any problem.
The Ascendant is in the Hora of the Sun; Moon, Lagna and Arudha are in
Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio. Rise in a fiery ascendant. No problem will

 arise. According to some people, the presence of Agnibhuta is necessary to
get the results of all the above yogas. According to some others, the
presence of Agnibhuta alone constitutes a different yoga and negates the
birth of children. For our part, we have not tested these formulations and
therefore cannot confirm their accuracy or otherwise: but the teachings of
the Gurus deserve our attention.
Verse 29. If the lord of the 5th house is in the 7th or 5th house; Or the lords
of the first and seventh join the fifth house; or the 5th or lord of Jupiter is
involved in the lagna; Children will be born. In the question related to
children, Jupiter should also be considered as the lord of children.
Verse 30. The lord of the ascendant and the 5th are in conjunction or they
see each other; Or they exchange signals. This yoga gives trouble to the
native.
Verse 31. If the Moon is in unfavourable signs from Arudha, then children
will be born. If it is reversed, there will be no result, the lagna rules the
husband. The opposite view is expressed by Madhava in his work on
Muhurta.
Notes
These verses have not been translated literally. When there is a repetition in
the original it is usually omitted. According to this shloka the position of
the Moon in the Anupachaya Rashis (except 3rd, 6th, 10th and 11th) from
Arudha denies the birth of a child, which means that Arudha rules the wife
and Lagna rules over the husband. Madhava, the famous author of the great
work Madhavi does not accept this view.
Verse 32. If menstruation occurs at a time when the Moon is in anupachaya
rasi from the point of view of Mars, the sexual relationship that follows it
will cause impregnation. Otherwise the mating fruit will be barren. The
time of fruitful sexual commerce is the day when the Moon, aspected by
Jupiter, is in the anchacha signs from the husband's Ascendant. The
favorable time for impregnation is Mool Nakshatra and other Muhurtas.
Festivals should be avoided.
Notes

 The author gives a fruitful or fertile period for impregnation. Menstrual
flow occurs when the Moon receiving the aspect of Mars occupies an
anupachaya rasi (second, fourth, fifth, seventh, eighth, ninth and twelfth)
from the position of the radical Moon in the wife's horoscope. After this,
when sex congress takes place, conception results. Conversely, if the
menstrual flow occurs when the Moon is in an anabolic position (3rd, 6th,
10th or eleventh) from the native Moon in the aspect of Mars, intercourse
will not result. Sexual union if done on a day when the Moon aspected by
Jupiter is in the third, sixth, tenth or eleventh position from the native Moon
of the husband or is in the Mool Nakshatra and the constellations are
declared good for feeding the first child and result in conception. Will give
To get the wife pregnant, on the eighth lunar day, Vishti, Riktha and
Atirakarana, the day of Shradh (annual ceremony) etc. should be avoided.
Verse 33. Several methods are used to determine the question of the birth of
children. t will give me below a method i got from my master.
Verse 34. The longitudes of Lagna and Yamkantak, correctly drawn, should
be added together. Attention should be paid to the relative strengths of the
resulting Rasi and Navamsa and the stronger of the two should be
considered to answer the question regarding children.
Notes
Example 1: Workday - Saturday.
Sunrise - 6.15 pm (Yamkantak rises over 18 valleys after sunrise on
Saturday). 18 valleys = 18 x 24 minutes. - 432 mins = 12m at 7 o'clock after
sunrise
Sunrise + 7h 12m = 13h 27m.
The ascendant rising at i3h 27m LMT gives the position of Yamkantak on
the day in question.
Example 2:
Ascendant - 143° 20'
Let Yamkantak = 136° 15'.

 Lagna + Yamkantak = 279° 35' or Makar 9° 35' (Rasi) and Pisces
(Navamsa). Capricorn and Pisces natives have a more powerful yogaspiritus and should be considered for answering the questions of the
children.
Psalm 35. If this yogasphut is upward, upward, or odd zodiac and is
aspected or aspected by auspicious planets, then the child is born very early.
Notes
Yogasphuta is indicated and Navamsa arrived according to verse 34. signs
are upwards
It is also called the upward or seroday signal. These are Gemini, Leo, Virgo,
Libra, Scorpio and Aquarius. Except Gemini, these signs are powerful
during the day.
If, for example, Yogasphuta is Leo and a benefic like Jupiter, Venus or a
well-connected Mercury is involved or aspected by it, we can conclude that
the child will not be born too late.
Verse 36. If Yogasphut is aspected, facing downward and in an even sign
with inauspicious and neutral planets or in sight, then no child will be born.
If Sphuta falls in the male sign and in the male navamsha, the birth of a
child is indicated.
Notes
Downward signs also known as Prasutodaya signs are Aries, Taurus,
Cancer, Sagittarius and Capricorn. They are powerful at night with Gemini.
Pisces sign forms a combination of both upward and downward and is
called Ubhayodaya Rasi with power both day and night.
For example, if Yogasphut falls in Taurus which is a downward sign and
even inauspicious planets like Mercury, Sun, Saturn, Mars or Rabu-Ketu
affect it from aspect or occupation, no child will be born. . However, for
example, if Yogasphut Aries falls in 15° 19', which is a Prashtha-Daya sign,

 then its Navansh is Leo, both the signs being male and other relevant
factors also being favorable indicates the birth of a child .
Shlok 37. The yogasphuta obtained by adding the longitudes of Yamkantak
and Arudha lagna is assumed as before that the woman is infertile or can
have children.
Notes
The yogasphuta mentioned here is different from the yogasphuta mentioned
in verse 34. But this Yogasphut should be analyzed in the same way as
explained in Shlok 34 to find out the infertility or otherwise of the wife.
Shlok 38. The lords of fifth house Jupiter and Yamkantak are associated
with or aspected by inauspicious planets and are devoid of aspects of
benefic; They hold negative expressions in even signs and even in
Navamshas; 5th house is afflicted; Santhana Tithi comes out after the 8th
day in the darkness of the lunar month: If all these afflictions are present,
we can infer that no child will be born. If only a few of these afflictions are
found, then after suitable remedial measures, babies will be born.
Notes
Negative houses are the sixth, eighth and twelfth houses. The lunar day on
which the question is placed is Santhana Tithi. If all the factors are afflicted
then there will be no child. If some are suffering, remedial measures can be
resorted to.
According to this verse, the factors in favor of not having children are (a)
Jupiter and Yamkantak, the lord of the fifth house, should be afflicted.
(b) He should be in the sixth, eighth and twelfth house.
(c) They should be in even signs and even navamshas.
(d) Fifth house is also afflicted.
(e) The question should have been placed after the 8th day of the dark half
of the lunar month.

 If all five factors are achieved, children will not be born. If only two or
three are present, then one may have a problem by taking remedial
measures like gifts, worship etc.
Shlok 39. If 5th house lord Jupiter and Yamkantak are not aspected or
related to inauspicious or transgender planets, and they are associated with
auspicious planets or do not aspect them, and 5th house comes in odd
zodiac and odd Navamsa Is; And if Santhana Tithi falls in half daylight of
the 5th lunar day, then the child will be born.
Shlok 40. If the lord of the 5th house of the twelfth house from the
ascendant is in the ascendant, then the child will be born within a year. The
child will be born in the same number of years as indicated by the number
of the house in which the lord is in the ascendant. If it is in 6th, 8th or
twelfth house then there will be no child.
Notes
In this verse the author tells the time of birth of an issue. The lord of the 5th
house from the Rasi represented by the Dwadsans Rasi of the Ascendant
resides in a house. In so many years the child will be born. Let the
ascendant Aquarius be 16°. It appears in the 7th dvadasanas which means
lion. If the lord of the fifth house from the sign of Leo is in the ascendant,
then problems arise in a year. If it is in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, or 5th house, then
the number will be born in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th or 5th year respectively. If the
lord is in the 7th, 9th, 10th or 11th house then the problem will arise after
remedial measures. If he is in 6th, 8th or 12th, no problem will arise.
Shlok 41. When Jupiter transits from 5th, 7th, 9th or 11th Rasi or Navamsa
Rasi, whichever is stronger, Yogasphut (mentioned in Shlok 34), and has a
beneficial effect on or is associated with the transit Rasi, An issue will arise.
On the other hand if the transiting sign is afflicted by sinners, the pregnancy
will not bear fruit.
Shloka 42. Connecting the longitudes of the lagna will result in the birth of
a child when the Moon, Yamkantak and Gulik fall in an odd sign and an

 odd Navamsa and a Kendra or a Kendra from Jupiter or a triangle and if
Mercury is Saturn, Rahu Or Ketu is not in any center or triangle.
Verse 43. If sexual union occurs in Jupiter Rasi or in the possession of the
lord of 5th in Navamsa, then Surya is in Rasi and is in possession of lord of
Navamsa
Navamsa Lagna, and Moon is in Rasi and is occupied by the lord of
Navamsha Lagna, the woman will conceive and give birth to a child.
Notes
During one of my visits to Kerala, I met a Panicker who was well versed in
Prasanna Marg.
According to him, verse 43 is to be understood as follows:
The Navamsa of Jupiter should be in the sign of the lord of the fifth house.
The Navamsha of the Sun should be in the sign of the lord of the fifth house
from the ninth of the ascendant. The Navamsha of the Moon should be in
the sign of the lord of the ascendant. The sexual union that takes place
under this planetary system results in pregnancy and child birth.
Navamsa. Jupiter should be in any one of these signs in transit.
Being a Navamsha Lagna Virgo, its lord is Mercury which is in Libra and
Dhanu Navamsh. The Sun should be in Libra or Sagittarius during the
transit.
Ascendant lord Venus is in Virgo zodiac and Taurus is in Navamsa. The
transiting Moon should be in Taurus or Virgo.
When sexual union takes place under such planetary arrangement in transit
(transit), the woman successfully conceives.
Between Rasi and Navamsa Rasi, the stronger it is considered.
The combinations given in this verse are, according to our author, a secret
clue given by his own master.

 Verse 44. Find the day on which the Moon crosses the Dvadasamsa Rasi of
the Lagna and the sum of the Moon's longitudes; the month when the Sun
transits the sign indicated by the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the
Moon; The year, when Jupiter transits the Lagna, obtained by adding the
longitudes of the Moon and Jupiter; And the exact Rasi by adding the
longitudes of Lagna, Sun, Moon and Gulik. If a sexual union takes place
under the above arrangement, the pregnancy results in the birth of a child.
Notes
This shloka enables one to decide a time for conception for sexual
intercourse and later for the birth of an issue.
The above verse is represented by the following formula:
Year: Ascendant + Moon + Jupiter - One Month: Sun + Moon. b
Day: (Lagna + Moon). = c
C's dwadsans rasi gives the day. Timings: Lagna + Sun + Moon + Gulik =
d.
The year in which Jupiter transits A, the month when the Sun transits B, the
day when the Moon transits the Dwadsansa Rasi of C and the time when D
rises on the Ascendant are suitable times for sexual union.
Whenever Rasi is mentioned it automatically shows that Navamsa Rasi is
also implied. Thus if Sun 4 Moon is in Aquarius and Libra is in Navamsa,
then the strongest of the two should be considered.
Here's a method to determine the fertile period for a sexual congress.
Childless couples wishing to have children can schedule their unions
according to the formula given here.
Verse 45. The planets which are in or aspected by the lord of the 5th house
(or the zodiac and navamsha occupied by the lord of the 5th house) indicate
the caste of the woman through whom the child is to be born. If the lord of
the fifth house has a vision of Jupiter and Venus, then the person will have
trouble through his wife.
Notes

 Strongest (a) planets that conjunct the lord of the 5th, (b) planets that aspect
the lord of the 5th, or (c) the zodiac and the Navamsha occupied by the lord
of the 5th leads to prediction Will give the caste of the woman from whom
the child is born. The aspect of Jupiter and Venus on the lord of 5th or 5th
house is enough to tell that the problem will be through married wife.
Most classical writers agree on the legitimate issue, that is, through his
estranged wife if Jupiter is involved.
According to Varahamihira in his Brihat Jataka, Surya and Mangal rule the
Raj Jati (Kshatriya or warrior caste) and the royal family, the Moon and
Mercury indicate the Vaishya (trading community). Jupiter and Shukra
indicate Brahmin, Shani Chandala or outcast and Ketu and Rahu, Asuri or
very heretical, foreigner, non-Hindu etc. Based on the planet involved, the
caste of the woman bearing one's issue can be ascertained.
Shlok 46. If the Yogasphuta formed by joining the longitudes of Lagna and
Yama-Kantak is in the same zodiac, then there will be no child. If
Yogsphuta is afflicted by sins, the wife becomes infertile. If Sphuta is in
Virgo and is aspected by Mercury and Saturn, then she will have two
adopted children.
Notes
Verse 46 gives three combinations for childlessness, infertility and
adoption. They can be listed sequentially as follows:
(a) Call the point reached by joining the longitudes of Lagna and
Yamkantak
as x

(b) If X falls in a common sign, no child is born.

 (c) If x suffers from the aspect or relation of sins, the wife will be infertile
(d) If X falls in Virgo and is aspected by Mercury and Saturn, then there
will be two children
be adopted.
My discussion with some pundits experienced in the techniques of Prasanna
Marga revealed that according to them the combination can deny the birth
of a child from the first wife, which means (as per the then prevalent
practice) that the native will marry the second wife with the child. to be
born. What if the second marriage also failed to produce a child? Pundits
say that if X is in Sagittarius (instead of Virgo), then after second marriage
the first wife gets a child. If x is in Pisces, then he marries a third wife
which causes him problems. If it is situated in an equal sign and gives a
benefic or benefic aspect, then all the three wives have to face issues.
In the light of modern social order, the details presented here may be of
academic interest only.
Shlok 47. If Yogsphut is with Mars and Saturn and aspected by Sun and
Mercury, then there is a quarrel between the adopted children. If Jupiter and
Venus have conjunction or aspect in 2nd house then the adopted child will
be cordial towards his parents.
Notes
If the X mentioned in the previous verse has a conjunction of Mercury and
Saturn and is aspected by the Sun, then the two adopted children will not be
well. If the Sun, Jupiter and Venus are in the place of vision for the second
time the adopted child will be prosperous and not quarrelsome. In
In other words, the adoption will be a success.
When Mercury is with x, the Sun cannot see it because Mercury can never
be further than 37° from the Sun. It is not clear whether a partial aspect has
been indicated.
The children's theme ends with verse 47.

 Verse 48. The question about the future of the child in the womb is known
as "Garbha Prasanna", it is to be answered as follows.
Shlok 49 Garbh Prasanna Lagna (Progeny - Ascendant) is the Yogasphut
formed by joining the Lagna and Yamkantak. Details about the mother
should be read from this Ascendant and Moon. From this point the seventh
house and the Sun represent the father. The nature of children etc. should be
ascertained from Jupiter.
Notes
x is referred to in the notes under verse 46 and the moon enables us to
obtain details about the mother; 7th from x and Sun represents details about
father. The position of Jupiter will tell whether any problem arises in
pregnancy or not.
Shlok 50. Ascendant, Moon, seventh house, Sun and Jupiter are weak and
aspected by sin, the parents die. If Jupiter alone is strong, the child will
survive alone.
Notes
Ascendant, Moon, Sun, seventh house and Jupiter should all be aspected
from weak (Nirvirya) and inauspicious (Asubhair Vilokyate) in the Prashna
chart. If the above factors are combined with efforts, then they can become
weak. If there is an inauspicious aspect or conjunction, then the factors
become weak and the parents and the unborn child die. If Jupiter is strong
then the child survives but the parents may die.
Shlok 51. If the Lagna, the lord of the Ascendant and the Moon are weak
due to being afflicted by malefic planets, then the pregnant woman dies. If
the Guru is weak, then the child also dies. If the seventh house, the lord of
the seventh and the Sun are all afflicted, the father dies. Here again if
Jupiter is strong then the father will die only after the safe delivery of the
child.
Verse 52. Sun with Mars indicates illness for father. Moon with Saturn
indicates illness to the mother. If the Moon is affected by any sin and it is
associated with some of the three sins, Mars, Saturn and Rahu, then the

 woman dies in pregnancy. If the Sun is afflicted by all three sins and is
devoid of beneficial effects, then the father of the child dies before his birth.
When Jupiter is afflicted, the child dies.
Notes

 Death of mother and father and death of child in
womb and whether father
dies alone and if so before or after the birth of the child, all can be predicted
by careful consideration of the combinations listed in this verse. When the
word 'victim' is used, it means that the planet concerned is either aspected
by the sinner or the sinner and is not under any beneficial influence. The
three powerful malefic planets are Mars, Saturn and Rahu. The intensity of
grief depends on the number of sinners involved. If all sins cause suffering
and if any auspicious result affects suffering, then the prediction should be
modified accordingly.
Shlok 53. If the lord of the twelfth house in the question chart and the
malefic planets are placed at the 12th position from the coming point
connecting the longitude of Jupiter, then the birth of an issue is ruled out. If
this affliction is found in the birth chart of the couple, then the indicated
event is bound to happen.
If the constellation obtained by the sum of the longitudes of Gulika and
Yamkantak is the third, fifth or seventh of the birth constellations of the
wife and husband, then there will be no problem.
Notes
According to some, apart from the longitude of Jupiter and the lord of the
twelfth house, the longitude of Arudha lagna should also be added and the
resultant zodiac should be considered. The verse says - Rifa Jivayoga
Bhavante - the longitude of the 12th (Rifa) and the lord of Jupiter (Jiva).
How or why Arudha is to be included is not at all clear.
Shlok 54. If Rahu is in the 5th house or is associated with the benefits of the
lord of the 5th house, then the child dies due to the curse of the snake-god.
Shlok 55. If Saturn is conjunct with Gulik in the Ascendant, 5th or 9th
house without the sight of auspicious planets, then the native dies due to
ancestral curse.

 Verse 56. The lord of the 5th house with Mars or the lord of the 6th house
and devoid of beneficial effects, causes the death of the issue due to the
curse of enemies.
Verse 57. The lord of the 5th house in the 5th house, devoid of auspicious
sight but under the sight of inauspicious planets, shows the curse of the
gods.
Verse 58. When the malefic planets are in the 4th house, Saturn conjuncts
the fifth house lord and the malefic planets are in the 12th house, the child
will die due to the curse of the mother.
Shlok 59. If there are malefic planets in the ninth house, the lord of
Panchmesh meets Shani and Gulik is in Trilok, then the problem dies due to
the curse of the father.
Notes
The above five verses extracted by the author from the Prasanna collection
give such combinations which indicate the death of the child due to the
curse.
Many may not be inclined to believe in the efficacy of blessings and the
power of curses.
In this fashionable era of the so-called "scientific temperament". It cannot
be denied that some people are born with strong passions that mostly find
expression in hurting others. When such persons 'curse', it is likely that the
curse may cause harm to the victim as no problem. When children raised
with affection and respect disappoint their aging parents, who need their
care, attention and affection, it is natural that the parent may feel bitter and
sad. This feeling may express itself in the form of a parent's curse, even if
the parent did not intend it. Rahu's pain of all the factors related to the fifth
house indicates the nature of the curse.
According to the above five verses:
Curse of Snake-god: Rahu in 5th, or with 5th lord, without any auspicious
aspect. Curse of ancestors: Saturn in 1st, 5th or 9th house with Gulika

 without benefic sight.
Curse of Enemies: Lord of fifth house or lord of sixth house with Mars
without any auspicious sight.
Curse of Devas (Gods): The lord of the 5th house is devoid of beneficial
aspect but under inauspicious aspect in the 5th house.
Mother's curse: malefic planet in the fourth house, conjunction of the fifth
lord Shani and inauspicious in the twelfth house.
Father's curse: Sin in 9th house, lord of fifth house with Saturn and Gulika
in 1st, 5th or 9th house.
Whether or not we attach any importance to blessings and curses, it is clear
that when a children's home is afflicted under the combinations above, one
must be careful in assessing the "sufferings" before giving in to its search.
The following verses list some more combinations for the death of children
due to curses, taken from the Prasanna collection.
Verse 60. If the lord of ascendant and 5th and Jupiter is weak as well as
luminous and lord of 9th house, then children will die due to the curse of
gods.
Verse 61. When the above-mentioned yoga is present and Jupiter or Venus
is conjoined with bad planets, the brahmins can be the cause of the curse.
If Sun and Moon are afflicted by sinners or they are debilitated or in enemy
signs, then the source of the curse will be men.
Verse 62. The lord of lagna and 5th and Jupiter is weak and placed in 6th,
8th or 12th position; The lord of the tenth house is associated with or keeps
an eye on sinners; So his own sinful deeds have made him nirguna.
Verse 63. The lord of the ascendant and the 5th and Jupiter is weak, the lord
of the 6th and Mars is strong and is associated with the previous mentioned
lords; or Mars and

 The lord of the 6th house is in the 5th house; So the misbehavior of enemies
is the cause of childlessness.
Verse 64. The lord of the ascendant and the 5th and Jupiter are strong;
performs sinful deeds in the 4th position, or the lord of the 4th is in the 6th,
8th or 12th position; So the fault is in your abode. If the above factors, such
as the lord of the ascendant, the lord of the 5th house and Jupiter join with
Rahu in the 5th house, then the anger of the serpent god is involved.
If Mars is also included in the above, then the anger of the snake is due to
the sinful deeds done by the native towards his own serpent.
Shlok 65. If the three factors mentioned above are strong and the Sun is
associated with sin, or the ninth house is weak and otherwise afflicted, then
the defects in the native's father's horoscope are responsible for the absence
of a child; And after the death of his father a child will be born. If the Moon
is afflicted in the ninth house, fourth house and the place of the Sun as
mentioned above, then the defect in the horoscope of the mother of the
native causes the absence of a child; The matter will arise after the death of
the mother
Shlok 66. If Vayu Bhuta rises in the ascendant, then there is loss of children
due to the curse of ancestors; If the fiery spirit rises, it is divine wrath; If
Akashbhuta rises then both Pitru and Devasap have to be mentioned. If
Prithvibhuta or Jalabhuta rises, then soon children will be born.
Notes
The rise of the ghosts or the elements of Vayu (Vayu), Agni (Fire), Akash
(Ether), Prithvi (Earth) and Jal (Water) is explained in the earlier verses.
Verse 67. The breath passes through the left nostril and the lagna is in the
sun's hora; The breath passes through the right nostril and is in the Hora of
the Ascendant Moon; Arudha lagna is even and lagna is odd; The lord of
the 5th house in the birth chart and the lord of the 5th house from Arudha in
the Prasanna Kundali is the same; or the two lords are closely related; Or
the tree in which Jupiter is standing at the time of question, the tree ruled by
that constellation is giving fruit. These indicate the birth of a child.

 Notes
Here the author mixes astrological conjunctions, biological phenomena and
even botanical phenomena. Childbirth is indicated when the following
conditions are present:
(1) Breathe in the Hora of the Sun through the left nostril and the
Ascendant.
(2) Right nostril in the moon's hora and breathing in the lagna.
(3) Prasanna lagna odd and Arudha lagna even.
(4) Close relationship (relationship or reciprocal aspects, etc.) between the
lord of 5th in Prasanna Kundli and lord of 5th in Janam Kundli.
(5) The tree in which Jupiter is situated, that constellation indicates that it is
going to give fruit.
To be honest, we haven't tested these combinations. It's up to the readers to
experiment with them. Perhaps based on the presence of one or more of the
above combinations we may have to speculate about the origin of the
issues.
Shlok 68. If the Navamsa comes from the sum of the longitudes of the Sun,
then the Moon and Jupiter are 7th, 1st, 5th or 9th from the Navamsha of
Gulik; If Jupiter is in a quarter from Rasi or Navamsa obtained by adding
5th and Lagna lord's longitude; And if Gulika is in trident from Jupiter, then
a child is born.
Notes
The shloka is not only interesting, but also gives combinations that in our
humble opinion have been found to be quite believable. The verses include
the following ideas:
(1) Add together the longitudes (in the Prasana chart) of the Sun, Moon and
Jupiter.
(2) Note down the rasi and navamsa which arrived in this way.

 (3) Note down the Navamsa of Gulick.
(4) If these two Navamshas are in mutual triangle or Samsaptak or opposite,
then it is a good sign for getting a child.
(5) Then add together the longitudes of the 1st and 5th houses.
(6) Note down the Rasi and Navamsa thus reached.
(7) If Jupiter is in one of the triangles in Rasi and Navamsa (6), it is a good
sign for getting progeny.
(8) If Gulika is in trikona from Jupiter then it is also a positive factor. Let's
take an example (Chart 5):
(1) Sun 116° Moon 53° Jupiter 222°
Therefore, Sun + Moon + Jupiter = 391 = 31° = x
(2) Rasi (of x) is Vrishabha and Navamsha (of x) is Makar
(3) Gulick's Navamsa is Capricorn.
(4) Both the Navamsa are same. Therefore, it is an auspicious yoga for
getting a child.
(5) Longitude of first house 312° Longitude of fifth house 72° 384 = 24° =
Y
(6) Rasi (of Y) is Aries and Navamsha of (Y) is Vrischika.
(7) Jupiter is not in one of the suggested Rasi or Navamsa in (6).
(8) Gulick is not in triangle with Jupiter.
If more than one factor is favorable then the birth of a child can be
predicted.
Verse 69. If there is a vision of Mars on Arudha, then the woman is said to
be pregnant. If she is not aspected by Mars, she cannot get pregnant because
of the excess blood in her body.
Verse 70. In the Ashtakvargas of the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter (in the
couple's horoscope) note the sign (in the Prasana chart) which should be the

 trinetra place from Gulika, with the highest number of points or points.
When the Sun, Moon and Jupiter transit in such a sign, a child is born.
Notes
The translation may seem a bit confusing.
The couple's birth chart and question chart have been considered in the
shloka. In the husband's horoscope, say Jupiter's Ashtakvarga. Note the sign
that should be a trident for the sign occupied by Gulika in the Prasanna or
Hori chart, which has the greatest number of dots. When Jupiter transits in
this sign then some problem is born. That is, the year is shown. Similarly
consider the Sun (in terms of their octaves) and the month indicated. Do the
same thing with the moon. Possible date will be known.
Suppose that in the birth chart, Jupiter has the highest number of points in
the Ashtakvarga, as in Cancer. And in Prasanna Kundali, Gulik is in Pisces.
Cancer is a triangle from Pisces. When Jupiter transits in Cancer, the year of
birth is indicated. Suppose the maximum number of points in the
Ashtakvarga of the Sun are in Cancer. When the Sun transits in Cancer, the
incident can happen. Similarly if the moon
Ashtakvarga, the highest point is in Scorpio, which is the trident sign of
Cancer, an issue can arise with the transit of the Moon to Scorpio.
The next stanza gives information (indicative factors) of pregnancy.
Shlok 71. When asked whether a woman is pregnant or not, the answer
should be in the affirmative, if Rahu is in the Lagna or Arudha or the fourth
Rasi.
Verse 72. If Jupiter is in 5th, 7th or 9th house from Ascendant or Moon or
has an aspect on it.
Verse 73. If the Sun or the Moon is surrounded by an aura at the time of the
question, then the woman is pregnant. The nature of the gender of the
person should be ascertained from the planets in the 7th house.

 Verse 74. If the Moon is associated with an auspicious house, the woman
becomes pregnant.
Note The above four verses are from Gyan Pradipika.
Shlok 75. If the lord of the fifth house is in the odd Rasi and the odd
Navamsha and the lord of the ascendant is in the center with Gulik, then the
woman is said to be pregnant. The above sign is seroshodya, which further
confirms the pregnancy. If Moon or Rahu is situated in or aspecting the
Navamsha of the lord of the fifth house, then there is no possibility of
pregnancy. If Mars is aspected on Navamsa then abortion occurs. If the lord
of the 5th house has a navamsha sign in a fixed sign and has a conjunction
or aspect of the debilitating Saturn, then the woman is not only pregnant,
but she also does not have regular menstrual periods.
Verse 76. If, at the time of Prasanna, any one of the following 14 symptoms
is seen, then the woman can be said to be pregnant: (1) pregnant woman,
(2) small child, (3) roar of thunder, (4) male and female birds pecking each
other, (5) the questioner or messenger touching her own feet, or hands, or
nostrils, (6) taking something out of a closed object such as a bag or vessel,
(7) Venus Lagna (8) Venus aspect the Ascendant, (9) Venus is in Arudha,
(10) Venus aspecting Arudha, (11) Venus is in the 5th house from the
Ascendant and (12) Venus is in the 5th house. Marriage home.
Comments Item number 5 contains three features.
Shlok 77. (1) Gulik and Moon are in the 5th house, (2) Gulik and Moon are
in conjunction, (3) Mars is aspecting the Moon, (4) Mars is in conjunction
with the Moon, (5) in the ninth house There are good fruits. House, (6) the
lord of the 5th house and the conjunction of Gulika, (7) Gulika has a vision
on the lord of the 5th house; and (8) the Navamsa of Gulik and Moon are
interconnected. If any one of the above eight yogas is present at the time of
Prasanna then the woman can be said to be pregnant.
Verse 78. The mark occupied by the pregnant woman while asking the
question should be noted. The woman's taste, sweet or sour, etc. should be
ascertained from the owner of that zodiac. If the lord is weak, then it is

 inferred that the woman is suffering from diseases indicated by the
inflammation of the dosha as told by the lord.
Notes
This verse gives an idea of the diseases that a pregnant woman may face.
And the next stanza indicates or indicates the abortion or dissolution of the
womb.
Verse 79. The signs revealing abortion are: The questioner or someone
suddenly leaves the happy place; or someone comes and leaves suddenly; or
the astrologer sees that a person is taking out clogs from his ear pits or body
openings; Or one fifth of the betel leaves given to the astrologer is found to
contain dead or half-lived rodents.
Verse 80. Abortion will take place under the following combinations: (a)
Mars or Sun is in a Kendra; Jupiter is in the centripetal house. The eighth
house is occupied by a planet; (b) Moon in one quadrant, a planet in eighth
and Jupiter in a sign other than the centre; (c) Moon in the Ascendant and a
malefic in the 19th Drakkana from the Lagna Drakkana; (d) Jupiter in one
Kendra, Mars in 8th house and Moon in Lagna.
Verse 81. As suggested in Gyan Pradipika, abortion will occur if the
surroundings are observed at the time of question.
Notes
The surroundings are the halo around the Sun and the Moon. According to
Varaha Mihir "The rays of the Sun and the Moon are formed in a circle by
the wind and are reflected in the sky with some clouds to form a halo with
colors and shapes. The various colors of these halos and their effects on the
earth are listed." .
Verse 82. According to the Moon, being in an odd or even sign, the child
will be male or female. Add together the numbers of weekdays,
constellations and lagna. If the resulting sign is odd, a male child will be
born. Even if, a female child would be born.
Notes

 According to the second part of the shloka, add together the number of
Nakshatras (counted from Ashwini), number of weekdays (counted from
Sunday) and the number of Lagna (counted from Aries). Let's assume that
the constellations, weekdays and lagna are Mrigashira, Thursday and
Aquarius respectively. Add them together:
Mrigasira 5
Thursday 5
Aquarius 11
= 21
Removing the multiples of 12 leaves the remainder 9, i.e. the 9th sign or
Sagittarius which is an odd sign and hence indicates the birth of a male
issue. According to some, this part of the verses can. It can also be
interpreted to mean that if among the lords of the weekdays, the lords of the
constellations
And the zodiac whose lord is the lord of the moon, if at least two lords are
male, then a male will be born.
Shlok 83. If Sun or Saturn is in the 3rd, 9th or 11th house from the
ascendant, then a child is born.
Verse 84. If all the planets are in odd signs, then a male child is born. If all
the planets are in even signs, then the birth of a girl is certain.
Note The above three verses are by Gyan Deepika.
Verse 85. Most of the classes of the ascendant are ruled by male or female
planets, a son or a daughter is born.
Notes
Find the rulers of the seven classes of the ascendant. If most of the rulers
are malefic planets, i.e. Sun, Jupiter and Mars, then the issue will be
malefic. If most of the planets ruling the Saptavargas are female planets,
i.e., Mercury, Venus and the Moon, then a woman is born.

 The above verse is from Vidvajjan Vallabh.
Shlok 86. In the 5th and 11th houses all auspicious signs indicate that the
woman is pregnant. If the Ascendant is in odd signs and the planets Sun,
Jupiter and Moon are also in odd signs, then the child is male.
Verse 87. If the Sun, Moon and Jupiter and the Ascendant are all in even
signs, the child will be a woman. If Saturn is in odd signs then the person is
male.
Verse 88. Sun and Jupiter are strong and hold odd signs, it indicates a male
child. Venus, Mars and Moon being in even signs indicates female
problems.
Shlok 89. Due to Saturn being in odd or even sign, there will be a matter of
son or daughter. In a marriage related question, if Saturn is in an odd sign,
then the marriage will happen soon. Otherwise there will be no marriage.
Notes
This verse is of Shatpanchshikha. All the above combinations are to be
applied on the Prasanna or the Terrible chart.
Shlok 90, Sun, Mars and Jupiter in the 7th house signify a malefic issue.
Moon, Mercury and Venus in the seventh house indicate that they are
female. If Sun, Mars and Jupiter are in the ascendant, then the person is
male. If Moon, Mercury and Venus are in the Ascendant, then there is a
problem for the woman. Saturn gives a son in the ascendant.
Verse 91. If the questioner or messenger touches the opposite parts of his
body with his right hand, then the child is male. If he touches the same parts
of his body with his left hand, then the problem is with a woman. If he
touches even organs with his right hand, the child dies.
Notes
The odd parts of his body are: head, chest, abdomen, vest, thighs, legs. He
has similar body parts: face, heart, waist, sex organs, knees and feet. The
sex of the dead child can be ascertained by the nature of the organs touched.

 Verse 92. If the Navamshas of Arudha and Lagna are even and they are
aspected by Moon, Venus and Mercury, then twin girls will be born.
Note Shani can also be included in male planets.
Verse 93. If Jupiter resides in a triad or quadrant, the child is male. If any
doubts arise at the time of questioning about these, one should rely on what
he sees or hears and also on the signs and then predict the gender.
Verse 94. If many men are seen, heard or spoken at the time of Prasanna, or
if Arudha is an odd sign, which is occupied by or aspected by malefic
planets, or if the messenger or questioner is standing in the four main
directions (East, South, West and North), or the gifts brought to the
astrologer are odd in number, or if these gifts are placed in the right hand to
the right hand, the issue is male. Otherwise, the child will be a woman.
Notes
Unexpectedly women are seen or women are heard talking, or stories of
women being talked about, or even signs of Arudha, and the female planet
occupying the same or holds the aspect, or the messengers hold the
remaining 4 diaks (SE, SW, NW, and N.E.) or the number of gifts brought is
an even number when counted or they are in the left hand on the left, then
issue is a woman.
Verse 95. When the questioner asks his question, he touches his head or any
part of the right side of the body; Or when Navamsa lagna is odd and
diurnal or when Saturn and strong Mercury are in odd signs, the native is
male.
Notes
Conversely, if he touches any part of the left side of his body or when the
Navamsha Lagna is in even and nocturnal signs or when Saturn and
Mercury are in even signs, the child is female.
The above four verses are from Prasanna Collection.
Verse 96. When the Sun, Moon, Jupiter and Lagna – all strong, are placed
in odd signs and odd Navamshas, the issue is malefic; When all these four
are in even signs and even Navamsa is of a woman. When Sun and Jupiter
are in contrasting signs, the child is male. If Moon, Venus and Mars are in

 even signs, then the child is a female. When they are in common signs, the
problem is twins. But if all four have an aspect
Mercury and situated in the ominous navamsa, twins are female.
Notes
The above difficult verse is quoted from Brihat Jataka of Varaha Mihir.
Whenever planets and lagna are mentioned, it is implied that they should be
powerful. Combinations can be listed as follows:
(a) Sun, Moon, Ascendant and Jupiter in odd signs and in odd Navamshas malefic numbers.
(b) Above in even signs and also in Navamsha - Female.
(c) Jupiter and Sun in contrasting signs - male.
(d) Moon, Venus and Mercury in even signs – Female.
(e) Jupiter, Sun, Venus and Mercury in normal signs and in odd or even
navamshas, visible from Mercury - twins.
(f) Vision of Mercury in the above four normal signs and in the odd
Navamsha - male
(g) In the above four general signs and even Navamsa - female twins.
(h) if the effect is balanced for both male and female twins - one male and
the other,

All these combinations may not be present in the Prasanna (or conception)
chart. if one of
If 8 combinations are present, the given result must be predicted.
As far as this verse is concerned, my personal experience is that it works
quite satisfactorily.

 The above verse read Mitra-cha instead of Yagrascha in some versions.
Verse 97. When Saturn is in an odd sign, except for the Lagna, the child is
of male gender. The gender of the child to be born has to be decided by
looking at the planets and their strengths mentioned earlier.
Verse 98. Fourteen-fourteen signs are given for male and female births.
The gender of the child should be estimated by balancing the Lakshyas.
Notes
Symptoms are signs or combinations listed in the above two verses. If the
symptoms for male birth are more than for female birth, the child born will
be a son; Otherwise, a daughter. Here the astrologer's ability to analyze the
combination decides the estimate.
Verse 99 The words arudha and lagna are interchangeable. But the strength
of both should be used when examining the effects.
Shlok 100. If the Ascendant is in the odd zodiac and in the odd Navamsha,
then there is a child.
a male. If the Lagna is in even zodiac and even Navamsha, then the child is
a woman.
Shlok 101. If the Navamsha of Lagna and Arudha is even and the female
planets are equal, then twin girls are born. If these navamsha signs are in
contrasting conjunction with malefic planets, the birth of male twins is
indicated.
Notes
Some astrologers in Kerala are of the opinion that both Navamsa and Rasi
should be taken into account for the required effect.
Verse 102. If the questioner feels with his hands those parts of the body that
are asymmetrical, then the male issue can be predicted. If he touches those
parts which are considered to be 'sama', then gynecological diseases will
arise.

 notes
Strange organs are nose, mouth, head etc., while organs are also eyes, ears,
hands,
e.t.c.
Verse 103. If the questioner feels with his right hand the parts of the body
which are
On the left, the child, a woman, will die. Conversely, if he touches the left
side of his body with his left hand, the male dies.
Verse 104. If the articles brought by the questioner are placed on the right
side of his person or if they are in odd numbers; Or if his actions reflect the
actions of a man, then the child is a man. If the gifts so brought are placed
or hidden to the left of her person or if they are even in number or if her
actions mark her as feminine, the child is a girl.
Shlok 105. Convert the longitude of the lagna (without signs) to minutes.
Multiply it by 3 and divide the product by 50. The quotient shows the signs
and the remainder of the fractions. Add the number of the zodiac signs to it.
Yoga represents the position of the Sun at the time of delivery.
Multiply the longitude of the Sun by 108. The product represents the
delivery of the Moon position.
In the position of Moon, find the longitude of the devoid of the zodiac so
obtained and multiply the total by 9. The Navamsa of the Sun is attained.
Notes
This verse is a bit confusing. personally i don't have
This method has been tested and hence it will be left to the readers to test it
and form their own opinion.
This verse enables one to find out the month and date of delivery. The
method is as follows:

 (i) Converting the longitude of the Ascendant (without signs) to minutes =
a.
(ii) Multiply a by 3 = b.
(iii) Divide b by 50.
b / 50 = x (quotient) + y (remainder)
(iv) (x + y) + Ascendant sign = s which is the position of the Sun at the time
of delivery.
(v) Multiply s by 108 = m, the position of the moon,
(vi) Multiplying the longitude (without signs) of m + lagna by 9 gives the
Navamsa of the Sun.
Example:
Ascendant is 16° 45' Libra,
(i) a = 16° 45' × 60' = 1005'
(ii) a x 3 = 3015 = b
(iii) b/50 = 3015/50 = quotient 60 (x) + remainder 15 (y).
(iv) s = 60.3 sign + 7 = 67.3 sign = 67 sign 9 degrees. That is, on removing
the multiples of 12, we get 7 Rashi 9 Ansh or Scorpio 9 Ansh as the
position of the Sun at the time of birth.
(v) Moon's position m = s x 108
That is, 7s 9° x 108 = 756s 972° = 11s 12° = Pisces 12° as the position of
the Moon = Pisces 12°.
(vi) m + ascending longitude (without signs)
- (342° + 16° 45') x 9 Sun's Navamsa = 358° 45' x 9 - 348° 45' or Pisces 18°
45'.
This will be the Navamsha position of the Sun at the time of delivery.
Since the delivery takes place in the 10th month, then adjust the month by
taking Trinal or Trikona Rasis.
As mentioned above, I have given a method that I understand. It is up to the
readers to assess its validity if it is actually applicable.

 Verse 106. When the Moon transits in the Dwadsansa Rasi of the lord of
Kakshya, in which the Lagna has a longitude, the signs of childbirth will
begin. When the Moon will transit in the Navamsha Rashi of the lord of
Kakshya, the woman will give birth. The Ascendant at the time of delivery
will be the sign in which the lord of Triasamsa of the lord of Kaksh stands
at the time of question. If the lord of the above Kaksh's Hora is ruled by the
Sun, then the delivery will take place in the day; If there is moon then the
delivery will happen in the night.
Verse 107. Take the stronger of the sun and the moon's draconas. When the
Moon crosses this Drakkana Rasi, delivery takes place, provided the Sun or
Moon is in the first Drakkana. If Drakkana is 2nd, natality occurs when
Moon is in 5th position from Drakkana Rasi. When Drakkana is 3rd then
this issue arises when Moon is in 9th position from Drakkana Rasi; Or take
the moon's twelfth. Count this Dwadsansa zodiac from Aries. When the
Moon transits in this sign, delivery takes place.
Notes
Example:
Sun = 6 degrees Aries, i.e. Aries dracana Moon = 17 degrees Cancer, ie
Scorpio dracana.
In between these two, the Sun is holding its exalted Dreshkana, he is strong.
When the Moon transits Aries, the delivery of a child can be expected, with
the Sun in the first Drakana.
Should the Sun be in Aries 13 deg, Dracaana would be Leo and still Scorpio
would be stronger than the Moon in Drackana. In this case, the delivery
occurs when Moon is in 5th position from Drakana Rasi, i.e. 5th from Leo
which will be Sagittarius.
If the Sun resides in the 3rd drekan of Aries or Aries at 23 degrees, the birth
will take place when the Moon will transit the 9th Leo, i.e., Sagittarius from
the dracana rasi of the Sun.
Alternatively, take the moon's dwadashamsa. Moon being 17 degrees in
Cancer, will be the 7th Dwadshansha. When the Moon passes through the

 7th sign from Aries, Libra, the problem can be resolved.
Verse 108. Multiply the Moon's longitude (signless) by 108 and find the
resultant rasi. When Moon transits in this or its Trimurti Rashi (whatever)
Downward), delivery will take place. The event will be certain if Gulika
associates or favors this Rasi.
Find the upcoming constellation by adding the longitudes of the Sun and
the Moon.
When the Moon transits in this nakshatra, childbirth takes place.
Notes
Example: Moon 24° 12' Cancer.
Sun 8° 45' Scorpio. Method 1:
Taking the longitude of the Moon without the zodiac, we have 24° 12' =
24.2°.
24.2 x 108 = 2613.6 degrees. Removing the multiples of 360, we get 93.6
degrees or Cancer 3.6 degrees.
Scorpio and Pisces are the tridents for this. of the three. Cancer and Pisces
are the downward signs. The transit of Moon in Cancer or Pisces indicates
the birth of a child, both the signs are more likely to be strong. Furthermore,
if Gulika joins one of these signs, that signal is confirmed. Method 2:
Sun + Moon = 218° 45' + 114° 12'
= 332° 57' = Poorvabhadrapada.
When the Moon transits in Poorvabhadrapada, childbirth takes place.
There is a suggestion that the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the
Moon (in terms of the zodiac) should be subtracted from 12 and the
resulting constellation should be considered. According to some, this step is
necessary only when the Rasi reaches by adding the longitude of the Sun
and the Moon is a night.

 Verse 109. The sum of the longitudes of the Ascendant and the Moon
should be multiplied by 12 and the resultant Nakshatra should be found.
When the Moon transits in this nakshatra or its trident, childbirth occurs.
The phenomenon can also happen when the Moon transits to the 5th
position from the Moon's Dwadsansa Rashi at the time of question; Or its
trines. Both the methods should be compared and the suitable one should be
selected.
Notes
Example:
Lagna is 312° 40' and Moon is 123° 12'.
Lagna + Moon = 312° 40' + 123° 12' = 435° 52'.
Multiplying 360 = 75° 52' = Gemini 15° 52'.
Taking the resultant longitude without sign, we get 15° 52' or 15° 86°.
15.86 x 12 - 190.32 which is counted from the first point of Aries gives
Swati (2).
The event occurs when the Moon is in Swati (2) or one of its three points,
Shatabhisha (2) and. crosses
Aridra (2). Optionally:
The moon's twelfth zodiac sign is Virgo. Childbirth can occur when Virgo
or its trine, Capricorn or Taurus, is transited by the Moon.
Shlok 110. Birth can be in Dwadsansa Rasi or Navamsa Rasi of the lord of
Dwadsansa Rasi of the Ascendant. These being triangles (for Ascendant) or
the relation being quadrilateral is another confirmation. Gulika's Navamsa
Rasi and her Trinetra can also be a "sign of delivery".
Notes
According to some people, the Navamsha Rashi of Gulika is important as
the night of Prasanna Divas. Any of the following symptoms may occur at
the time of delivery:

 (1) Dwadsans Rasi of the Ascendant.
(2) Navamsa Rasi of the lord of the Dwadsans Rasi of the Ascendant.
For example, if the ascendant Virgo is in the twelfth and its lord i.e.
Mercury is in the Capricorn Navamsa, then the birth sign will be Virgo or
Capricorn.
If there is a Virgo or Capricorn in the ascendant, then this is another
confirmation.
(3) If Gulika is in Navamsa Rasi, that is, Gulika is in Kumbh Navamsh,
then there may be Aquarius ascendant at the time of delivery.
Out of the many given Rasi - the one associated with Gulika has the highest
chance of forming a Ascendant at the time of the child's birth.
Shlok 111. Childbirth can happen when the Sun rises in the Dwadsans Rasi
or its triple. The Dwadshansha Rasi and the Navamsha Rashi of the Lagna
can also be considered. Their relative strength should be weighed and
preference should be given to the sign relative to Gulika.
Shlok 112. In this way a square quadrilateral is obtained. Navamsa multiplying the longitude of a planet by 9; Nav Navamsa by multiplying the
longitude of a planet by 81; Navamsa Dwadasans - Navamsa longitude
without a sign is multiplied by 12 and the symbols omitted earlier are
added; and dvadasanas - multiplying the longitude of the planet with no
zodiac sign by 12 and adding to the result, the original signs were discarded
first.
Notes
This shloka enables us to calculate 4 important divisional charts, viz., (1)
Navamsa, (2) Nava Navamsa, (3) Navamsa Dwasansha and (4) Dwasansha.
While Navamsa and Dwadshansha are common in all text books on
astrology, Nava Navamsa and Navamsa Dwadshansha are specific to this
task. We will apply the principles to an example, such as the position of the
Sun at the time of Prasanna, Cancer 23° 12' or 113°.2.
(1) Navamsa: Multiply longitude by 9.

 113°.2 x 9 = I018°.8. Taking the multiple of 360, we get 298°.8'. Dividing it
by 30 gives the result 9s 28° 48' or Capricorn 28° 48'. This is the position of
Sun in Navamsa.
(2) Nav Navamsa: When the longitude of a planet is multiplied by 81, this
divisional chart is obtained:
In example:
113°.2 x 81 - 9169°.2
On subtracting the multiples of 360, the remainder is 169°-2 which is 5s 19°
12'. The position of the planet Virgo is 19° 12' in the Navansh Kundali.
(3) Navamsa Dwadsansa: Navamsa longitude (ie 28° 48' or 28° .8) without
symbols is multiplied by 12.
That is, 28.8 x 12 - 345.6 - 11s 15°.6.
The omitted sign, ie 9, is added to it (11s 15°.6 + 9 = 20s 15°.6 = 8s 15°.6).
Hence the Navamsa Dwadshansha of the planet is 8s 15°.6 or Sagittarius
15° 36'.
(4) Dwadsansa: The longitude of a planet (devoid of signs) is multiplied by
12. 23°.2 x 12 = 278° 4 = 9s 8°.4
To this the previously omitted signs are added, i.e., 3. Hence the planet's
twelfth position is 9s 8°.4 + 3s = 12s 8° 24' = Aries 8° 24'.
The veracity of these findings can be verified by applying the usual
methods of calculation of divisional charts. Here, each chart is drawn to
equal a perfect circle and hence the longitude of the sub-divisional chart is
also given.
Verse 113. (a) When the Moon transits Arudha Lagna or a trident from it
which should be adhomukhba, the child is born. It should be kept secret.
Notes
According to some people, the Navamsha Rashi of Gulika is important as
the night of Prasanna Divas. Any of the following symptoms may occur at
the time of delivery:

 (1) Dwadsans Rasi of the Ascendant.
(2) Navamsa Rasi of the lord of the Dwadsans Rasi of the Ascendant.
For example, if the ascendant Virgo is in the twelfth and its lord i.e.
Mercury is in the Capricorn Navamsa, then the birth sign will be Virgo or
Capricorn.
If there is a Virgo or Capricorn in the ascendant, then this is another
confirmation.
(3) If Gulika is in Navamsa Rasi, that is, Gulika is in Kumbh Navamsh,
then there may be Aquarius ascendant at the time of delivery.
Out of the many given Rasi - the one associated with Gulika has the highest
chance of forming a Ascendant at the time of the child's birth.
Shlok 111. Childbirth can happen when the Sun rises in the Dwadsans Rasi
or its triple. The Dwadshansha Rasi and the Navamsha Rashi of the Lagna
can also be considered. Their relative strength should be weighed and
preference should be given to the sign relative to Gulika.
Shlok 112. In this way a square quadrilateral is obtained. Navamsa multiplying the longitude of a planet by 9; Nav Navamsa by multiplying the
longitude of a planet by 81; Navamsa Dwadasans - Navamsa longitude
without a sign is multiplied by 12 and the symbols omitted earlier are
added; and dvadasanas - multiplying the longitude of the planet with no
zodiac sign by 12 and adding to the result, the original signs were discarded
first.
Notes
This shloka enables us to calculate 4 important divisional charts, viz., (1)
Navamsa, (2) Nava Navamsa, (3) Navamsa Dwasansha and (4) Dwasansha.
While Navamsa and Dwadshansha are common in all text books on
astrology, Nava Navamsa and Navamsa Dwadshansha are specific to this
task. We will apply the principles to an example, such as the position of the
Sun at the time of Prasanna, Cancer 23° 12' or 113°.2.
(1) Navamsa: Multiply longitude by 9.

 113°.2 x 9 = I018°.8. Taking the multiple of 360, we get 298°.8'. Dividing it
by 30 gives the result 9s 28° 48' or Capricorn 28° 48'. This is the position of
Sun in Navamsa.
(2) Nav Navamsa: When the longitude of a planet is multiplied by 81, this
divisional chart is obtained:
In example:
113°.2 x 81 - 9169°.2
On subtracting the multiples of 360, the remainder is 169°-2 which is 5s 19°
12'. The position of the planet Virgo is 19° 12' in the Navansh Kundali.
(3) Navamsa Dwadsansa: Navamsa longitude (ie 28° 48' or 28° .8) without
symbols is multiplied by 12.
That is, 28.8 x 12 - 345.6 - 11s 15°.6.
The omitted sign, ie 9, is added to it (11s 15°.6 + 9 = 20s 15°.6 = 8s 15°.6).
Hence the Navamsa Dwadshansha of the planet is 8s 15°.6 or Sagittarius
15° 36'.
(4) Dwadsansa: The longitude of a planet (devoid of signs) is multiplied by
12. 23°.2 x 12 = 278° 4 = 9s 8°.4
To this the previously omitted signs are added, i.e., 3. Hence the planet's
twelfth position is 9s 8°.4 + 3s = 12s 8° 24' = Aries 8° 24'.
The veracity of these findings can be verified by applying the usual
methods of calculation of divisional charts. Here, each chart is drawn to
equal a perfect circle and hence the longitude of the sub-divisional chart is
also given.
Verse 113. (a) When the Moon transits Arudha Lagna or a trident from it
which should be adhomukhba, the child is born. It should be kept secret.
notes
Astrologers in Kerala also take the Ascendant and its triangles as a sign of
childbirth. Let's say Arudha is Aries. The triangles are Leo and Sagittarius,

 Sagittarius is facing downwards. When the Moon transits in this sign,
problems will arise.
Shlok 114. If the planets are unfavourably placed causing obstruction in the
birth, then the person has to resort to remedial measures.
Shlok 115. If Sun or Saturn is in the eighth place in the odd zodiac sign by
joining the Moon, then the ancestors should be pleased. If Sun is in even
sign, then holy temples should be visited and Kshetra Pind should be
offered. Similarly, if Saturn is in an inauspicious house and an even sign,
people must offer 'food'. Sun in odd or even sign (in bad house) requires the
performance of chanting as a remedial measure.
Verse 116. If the Moon is in the negative house, then Shradh should be
performed in the following:
Gone. Or the musicians should be engaged to sing and dance in the divine
presence. If both the Sun and the Moon are afflicted by evil planets, then
the trouble is caused by the phantom; And for their liberation, Kshetra Pind
should be performed and devotional music should be sung.
Shlok 117. When Mars is in negative sign, which is also odd, then Lord
Subrahmanya should be worshipped and pious Brahmins should be given
food. When Mars is in even sign, Durga should be worshipped. If Mercury
is equally situated, then Lord Vishnu should be worshiped with Panchamrit
and Payasa, Brahmins should be fed food and Saubhagya Sukta should be
chanted.
Shlok 118. If Jupiter is in a negative place in an odd sign, then it should be
consumed with Kalyandighrit mantras. If the guru is in the even octave
sign, then Shankar Narayan should be worshipped and one thousand
brahmins should be fed.
Shlok 119. If Venus is in the eighth and odd signs, then Yaksha Puja should
be performed with roti, paisa, perfume, song and music. If Venus is in even
an unfavorable house, then the deities should be worshipped and food
should be taken to satisfy the brahmins.

 Shlok 120. If Shani is responsible for the absence of dosha and he is in an
unfavourable sign in an unfavorable house, then the snake ball should be
performed. If it is in even zodiac, then the dancers should get the snake
dance done. If Saturn is in unfavorable position in normal signs, then snake
pictures should be gifted.
Notes
Shlokas 114 to 120 deal with remedial measures to neutralize the sufferings
arising from certain complete configurations which hinder the birth of
issues.
It is said that the birth of children is denied due to many reasons like the
displeasure of the ancestors.
The position of the planet in the negative house or house causes distress.
The nature of the remedy depends on the odd or even nature of the sign in
which the eighth house comes. The verses are simple and can be understood
easily.
All these remedies have been discovered for some curses and dreams. We
don't want to make any observations about whether such curses actually
work or not. Western science cannot boast of all knowledge. Areas of
knowledge still unknown to Western science were studied and understood
by ancient seers. Those who do not wish to believe these remedies or the
sufferings given are free to reject them, but there are factors that seem
impossible that may contain germs of truth.
Verse 121. On the date of birth, the child should be taken out from the Sun
and the child Moon. This date should be used to determine the birth of an
issue.
Notes
The following verses tell the method of working of Santana Surya, Santana
Chandra etc.

 Verse 122. According to some Acharyas, five times the Moon's longitude
and five times the Lagna's longitude respectively give progeny moon
(children Chandra) and child sun (children Surya).
Notes
This verse shows that the method of calculating the child Sun and the child
Moon given here is according to some Acharyas, which means that there
may be some other method approved by the author of this work. The
manuscript I have doesn't have this method. But I have come to know from
the pundits of Kerala that the method adopted by the author is as follows:
The time of "Ishta" or Prasanna is reduced to Vightis and divided by 50.
Convert it to signs, degrees and minutes. Call it X. Subtract 30° or one rasi
from it. When the remainder is multiplied by 5, the child Sun is obtained.
Add 8 signs and 15 degrees to x. On removing the multiples of 12, multiply
the resulting number by 5 and you get Santana Chandra. We will call the
method in the verse A and the method described in the notes as B and create
an example.
Example: 'A': Sun Cancer 23° 12' = (3s 23° 12') Moon = Taurus 27° 26' =
(ls 27° 26')
Child Sun 3s 23° 12' x 5 = 18* 26°
= 6s 26°
= Libra 26° Child Moon 1s 27° 26' x 5 = 9s 17° 10'
= Capricorn 17° 10' Example B Birth time: Ghatis 32 and Vigbatis 45 after
sunrise.
= 32 x 60 + 45
= 1965 past
1965/50 = 39s 15°/50
Multiplying the remainder by 30 (to convert it to degrees), we get 15 x 30 /
50 = 9° . Get

 Removing the multiples of 12 from 39, we get 3s 9° x, subtracting one sign
from x, the remainder is (3s 9° - 1s) = 2s 9° or Gemini 9°.
By multiplying 2s 9° by 5, we get the child Sun or the child Sun = 2s 9° x 5.
Is obtained
= 10s 45° = Liss 15° or Aquarius 15° x Adding 8 signs and 15 degrees, we
get 3s 9° +
8s 15°

= 11s 24°. it 5. multiply by
11s 24° x 5 = 59s = 11s = Aquarius 30°. This child is Chandra or child
Moon.
The second principle is that if Arudha lagna is strong then this method
should be applied. If
Prasanna Lagna is strong, the method given in Shlok 122 should be used.
To be honest, I have not been able to test these methods myself, and
therefore I am unable to
Give me my opinion An astrologer Panikar, Late Shri K.K. A close
colleague of Kurup, whom I met in Thrissur in 1958, said that the method
given in the verse should be accepted in preference to the cumbersome
method described in the notes.
Verse 123. The birth date is obtained by subtracting the longitude of the
child Sun from the longitude of the child Moon. If this date falls in Shukla
Paksha then problem is born. If it is half dark then problem will arise after
taking remedial measures. If the date is before the 6th date of Ashtami,

 there will be a delay in the birth of the problem. If after 10th the incident
will happen soon.
Shlok 124. If there is delay due to Tithi falling in Shukla Paksha, then Lord
Vishnu should be pleased. If the date is getting delayed due to falling in
darkness, then Lord Shiva should be worshipped. If the date is 7th, 8th, 9th
and 10th (dark half), then after second marriage an issue will arise for
second wife. Even after remarriage, Brahmins should be worshiped and
eaten on the days of Amavasya and Shravan.
Verse 125. If Santana Tithi (or Santana Lunar Day) falls from 11th to 14th,
then the native will have an adopted child. If it falls on a new moon or full
moon day, there will be no problem, not even the adopted child. There will
be childlessness due to dissatisfaction of the fathers. Celebrations should be
performed on the days of the festival to satisfy the ancestors. The discontent
of the fathers will be the main reason for childlessness.
Shlok 126. If Santana Tithi falls on the sixth lunar day, then Lord
Subrahmanya should be worshipped; Ganpati should be invoked on the 4th;
Durga Puja should be done on the 9th; Worship the Sun on the 12th;
Worship Nag Devta on 8th; Worship the ancestors on the new moon day.
Notes
All these measures should be adopted when Sanatan Tithi falls in darkness.
half.
Verse 127. Santhana Tithi is falling on 4th, 9th or 14th lunar day
Either party denies the birth of an issue by reason of misconduct. The
solution is to read the Puranas. If the child date falls on the fourth lunar day,
then the remedy should be done by the people of the upper class; If on the
9th, lower class people should do the remedy. The reason for childlessness
is a snake god if the date of progeny comes in the poison. If it happens to be
the bright half, then the curse is recent; If it is half dark, then the curse is
too old.

 Verse 128. In the bright half, Vishikaran falls on the 4th (Chaturthi), 8th
(Ashtami), 11th (Ekadashi) and full moon; In the dark half, Vishishkaran
falls on the 3rd (Triteya), 7th (Saptami), 10th (Dashami) and 14th
(Chaturdashi). If 3rd and 4th are suffering from poisoning, then the trouble
comes from good natured serpents; If 7th and 8th is
Similarly, there is trouble with the suffering, second class of serpents; If the
10th and the 11th are equally afflicted, the trouble is caused by the cruel
serpents; And if afflicted on 14th and Amavasya, then very bad serpents
cause trouble. The remedy is to perform snake sacrifice, especially for good
natured people. Others require devotional songs, dances etc.

to keep.
Verse 129. Much about Santana Tithi. There are other uses from which it
can be

Verse 130. Five times the Moon's longitude (at the time of question) minus
five
The longitude of the Sun gives manifold child birth dates. If it refers to the
bright half, the birth of an issue is indicated. The question of having
children by the 5th lunar day is doubtful. From sixth to tenth, chances are
moderate. From 10th onwards the result is certain.
Verse 131. If the child date falls in the dark half, then the effects will be as
follows: 1 and 2 - children will be born and no second marriage is
necessary; 3 - Two marriages are required.; fourth - three marriages; 5th four marriages; Sixth - five marriages. Still, appropriate measures should be
taken.

 From 7th to 10th, the person should take measures. From the 11th to the
new moon, those who do good deeds will not have any problem. But
perhaps he may have some problem in the end by the special force of his
karma.
Notes
At the time of question the Moon is 8s 15° and the Sun is 4s 25°.
Santana Tithi = 5 (Moon) - 5 (Sun) = 42S 15° - 25s 5° = 18s 10° or 6s 10° =
190° i.e. dark half.
Since it is the first date of darkness, children will be born.
Shlok 132. If Santana Tithi falls on the 7th of darkness, then the questioner
will have to adopt a brother's son; If it is the eighth, the person has to adopt
a son from his gotra or lineage; If it is the ninth, she will have to adopt two one from other families and the other from her own family.
Verse 133. As the Santana tithi falls on the 10th or 11th day of the dark half,
his heir will be the son of his sister or one adopted from a different family.
If it is 12th, then his property will go to his other relatives.
Shlok 134. If it is the 13th day then the property of the student will go to the
temples. If it is the 14th, it will be appropriated by the rulers. If it is
Amavasya, people will grab his wealth as there will be no claimants.
Verse 135. By examining the progeny date, good deeds can be
recommended so that men are in trouble. The remedies suggested by the
sages of ancient times are given below:
Shlok 136. Even if Santana date falls in Shukla Paksha, Vishti and Vacant
are not good. If it is the fourth day, then Ganapati Homa is recommended. If
it is Navami, then the worship of Durga is fruitful. And if it is 14th then
worship of Shiva will be useful.
Notes

 The special effects of Visbati are not mentioned here. Therefore it can be
recommended.
Verse 137. If the child's date falls on the full moon day, then the Purusha
Sukta should be recited. If the moon is afflicted, then the stories of the
moon, its origin etc. should be heard.
Verse 138. Santan Gopal should be worshiped if the Santan tithi falls on the
first day of the dark half. If it falls on the second day then Panchagavya and
other medicinal ghee should be consumed.
Verse 139. If it is the third, then the goddess Durga is to be worshipped; If
this fourth Ganapati Homa should be done; If there is a fifth, then the total
deity should be worshipped; If it is the sixth lord then Subramaniam should
be invoked; If it is the 7th, then Shankaranarayana should be invoked; If it
is the eighth, then the serpent god should be worshipped; And if it is tenth,
then one thousand brahmins should be fed.
Shlok 140. If Santana Tithi falls on the 10th day of darkness, then half-gana
homa should be done; Havan should be performed in holy places on 11th;
Brahmins should be fed food on the 12th day of Shravan Nakshatra. Jaya
ball should be offered on i3th.
Shlok 141. If it is the 14th day, then Brahmins should be fed food on
Monday and offer Pitru Bali and Pitru Pind at holy places.
Shlok 142. If it is Amavasya, then do Ashtak Shradh, Parvan Shradh and Til
Homam. The same remedy is good for the first day of the dark half.
Verse 143. We will again devise some methods regarding the issues
applicable to both Kundli and Hori based on the position of Jupiter.
Verse 144 and 145. Five times the sum of the longitudes of Lagna and
Yamkantak gives the position of Brihaspati (Children Guru). If it is dosha
with nine afflictions (Nav doshas), then one cannot get any problem without
resorting to relief measures. In case of desire for a child, a person should
remarry under the following conditions: (a) If Tithi Sphuta – This is
obtained by subtracting the longitude of the Sun from the longitude of the
child, then the Guru is afflicted; (b) if the Navamsha of the child Jupiter

 falls in Taurus or Libra; or in the sign occupied by the progeny Sukra; (c) if
he has the sight of the child Sukra; (d) If it falls in the constellation of
Venus.
The number of marriages is indicated by the number of planets in the 7th
house.
Sanatan Sukra. The native has trouble with the first or second wife due to
the strong sign or Navamsh of the child Venus.
Notes
Santana Shukra (or Santana Shukra) is obtained by multiplying the
longitude of Venus (at birth or at the time of question) by 5. Example:
Sun is 23° in Cancer; Ascendant - Aquarius 14°; Yamkantak — Gemini
15°; Jupiter - Scorpio 14°; and Venus - Leo 4°. Determination of child
master:
Yamkantak + Lagna = 2s 15° + 10s 14° - 12s 29° Child Guru (S.G.) = 12s
29° x 5 - 64s 25° = Leo 25°.
If SG is suffering from any of the 9 doshas (Nav doshas), remedial
measures should be adopted to get over the issues. Determination of date
spurt:
Tithi Sphuta - Child Jupiter - Sun = 4s 25° - 3s 23° Tithi Sphuta - 1s 2° or
Taurus 2°
The corresponding date (lunar day) is 32/12 = 2 8/12 = third or tritiya. If it
is afflicted, the native is advised to remarry if there is a problem.
Determination of child Venus: Example: Santana Venus - Venus x 5
- Leo 4° x 5
- 4s 4° x 5 = 20s 20° compared to Venus 8s 20° or Sagittarius 20°.
(a) The Navamsha of the child Guru is Vrischika (the eighth Navamsha in
Leo sign) and not that of Taurus or Libra. Therefore there is no fault.
(B) The child does not come in the sign of Jupiter (Leo 25°), the child
Venus (Sagittarius 20°). Therefore there is no fault.

 (c) The child is in Pubba ruled by Guru Shukra. Hence the fault exists.
Balancing the doshas or doshas, it has to be estimated whether the native
will get a child from his (first) wife or not.
IV (a) The number of marriages is known from the number of planets in the
seventh from the child Sukra (Sagittarius 20°). In the example of the
question, there is no planet in the seventh from Santhana Venus.
(b) The sign of child Venus is Sagittarius; Navamsa belongs to Libra zodiac.
Rasi is strong. So we can say that the native will have trouble with the first
wife.
It should be noted here that these astrological principles were developed at
a time when there was no legal restriction on the number of marriages a
man could have. But today a Hindu cannot marry a second time when the
first wife is alive or not divorced, while some sections of non-Hindus are
free to have multiple wives.
Therefore, the correct use of these two verses depends on the current social
Conditions and legal factors placed in the way of the majority population of
this country.
Shlok 146. If the child Venus falls in a neuter Navamsha or if there are
neuter planets on this Navamsha, then the person will have to get married
for the third time to get a child.
Notes
The Kinnar Navams are Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn and Aquarius. The neuter
planets are Mercury and Saturn.
Shlok 147. When the sum of the child Guru and Yamkantak is multiplied by
9, one gets the child yoga sphuta. This gives an idea of the number of
children.
Shlok 148. The concluding part of the child yoga spruta indicates the
number of children. If it is 5 degrees, the native will have a problem; If it's
10 degrees, then two; If it's 15 degrees, 3 and so on. When the three

 sections of the Santana Yoga Sphuta are governed by Jupiter, one will have
more than six sons.
Notes
Our writer has come up with another way to estimate how much trouble
someone will have. In light of the fact that the birth of children today can be
prevented by all types of birth control methods, these principles should be
adapted to the current social environment. Of course, as in some Western
countries, there may come a day when the birth rate drops to such an extent
that we can return to the conditions before these methods of family
planning were introduced. Determination of child yoga sphuta:
Santhana Guru + Yamkantak
= Leo 25° + Gemini 15° = 4s 25° + 2s 15°
= 7s 10°
Santhana Yoga Sphuta = 7s 10° x 9
= 63s 90° = 66s = Virgo 30°
The number of children at the rate of 5° per mark will be 6. The lords of
Sadvarga of Virgo 30° are as follows:

 Rasi Hora Drekkana Navamsa Dvadasamsa
Trisansa
Mercury Sun Venus Mercury Sun Mars
Jupiter is not square at all. Hence the requirement of Jupiter governing the
three classes in Santana Yoga Schut does not apply here.
If Jupiter's squares are more than three, then there will be more than 6 sons.
Shlok 149. Take only Drakkana, the master of Santana Yoga. When he is
debilitated or is in an enemy sign, the loss of children should be predicted in
the following way: If the terminating part of longitude of this lord in the
Rasi is 5 degrees, the eldest son will die;
If it is 10 degrees, the second son will die; Thus count till the end of the
sign.
If the Navamsha of Yoga Spita is from Taurus, Leo, Virgo to Scorpio, then
the person does not have any children.
Notes
The verses are easy to understand. Just as the lord of Drakana is taken, in
the same way, child yoga can also be taken.
Shlok 150. If there are three squares of Mercury and Saturn in the child
yoga, then twins are born. If these planets are weak, the twins die.
Shlok 151. Multiplying the sum of the longitudes of Mercury, Saturn and
the lord of the 5th house by 5 gives Datta Sphut. If it is in a solar sign and a
lunar navamsa and is associated with or aspecting sin, a child will be
adopted. If the above Sphuta stands in Chandra Rasi and Solar Navamsa,
then no child will be adopted.
Shlok 152. If Datta is suffering from sphuta Nava doshas, then the person
will have no son, not even adoptive.

 Shlok 153. When Jupiter transits in the child's Jiva, Spita Rashi and its
Trinetra, the child will be born. But this will happen only if the first part of
the amount is occupied by Gulika. When Gulik is in the second part, the
problem will arise when Jupiter will cross the Navamsa Rashi of Santhana
Jiva and its trikonas.
Find the Navamsa of the sum of Gulika Sphuta and Yamkantak.
According to this Navamsa is odd or even matter of male or female.
Shlok 154. Navamsa Rasi of Yoga Sphuta is important in determining the
sex of the child. As it is odd or even, the issue will be male or female.
Shlok 155. Add Santana Guru Sfuta, Yamkantak and Santana Gulika.
Multiply the total by 81. Find the constellation of the resulting figure. The
child is born when this nakshatra or its triangle is transited by the Moon.
Notes Santana Gulika is obtained by multiplying Gulika by 5.
Verse 156. The question of 'issues' has been explained in many ways in this
chapter. When it is found that no one will have any problem or the problem
will die, suitable remedial measures obtained from the date of birth should
be adopted. Suitable advice should be given if adoption of a son or birth of
a son from a second marriage is indicated.
Verse 157. If the birth of a son is shown, the time of birth should be
determined taking into account the transiting position of Jupiter, Saturn,
Sun or Moon. If the question pertains to a pregnant woman then the gender
of the issue must also be definitely guessed.
Verse 158. I have described "Santhana Prasanna" above based on the
writings of the ancient sages to see this question as clearly as possible in as
many ways as possible.

 Issues according to birth horoscope
Verse 1. We will now describe how the details about the progeny - their
number, their time of birth, etc., and if there is no problem why it is so, etc.,
can be read from the horoscope.
Notes
This chapter mainly deals with the methods of predicting the details about
the children on the horoscope.
Methods based on Prasanna are given in the previous chapter.
Verse 2. If the Moon is in an inauspicious sign in the horoscope of the wife
and is aspected by one of the planets, then she will give birth to a child. If
the Moon is in anchaya sign and aspected by strong benefic planets, then he
will have children, provided remedial measures are taken. In the horoscope
of the husband, the Moon being associated with good planets in the anchaya
zodiac indicates towards the child. If the Moon is in an anachaya sign and
its aspect is from the point of view of the planet, then only after taking
appropriate measures, the child is born. However, there will be no problem
if the Moon is in Anupachaya in the horoscope of the wife and the Moon is
devoid of auspicious aspect in the horoscope of the husband.
Verse 3. There will be no problem if there is no strength for Kshetra (in
female horoscope) and Bija (in male horoscope). Therefore it is necessary
to check them.
Verse 4. The power to conceive is bestowed by the Sun, while Venus
controls the semen. If both of these are in the odd zodiac signs and the odd
Navamshas and are strong, then the male has "Beej Shakti" and is able to
conceive females. In a woman's horoscope, Mars governs the nature of
blood and the Moon governs the ability to produce children. If these are in
both the signs and even the Navamshas, the woman has the power of the
field to bring out the issues.
Notes

 If Mars and Moon are not strong then the woman will not have a child. If
there are some good qualities and weak qualities for these planets, then only
after necessary remedial measures, the child will be born.
Verse 5. Divide the finished part of the asterisk occupied by Jupiter in the
valleys and valleys by 5 and note the resulting signs etc.
Similarly treat the expired part of the star occupied by Sun and Venus. By
mixing all these three seeds inflate. Similarly deal with the depleted portion
of asteroids captured by Mars and the Moon. By their yoga, the fruit field
obtained from the planetary constellation of Jupiter is obtained.
Notes
The average time taken by the Moon to pass through an asteroid (13° 20' or
200') is about 60 ghats, meaning that the time required is about 4.5 ghats
per degree of longitude. According to the author, this velocity is to be used
in the calculation of seed velocity and field velocity.
Suppose Jupiter is in 12° 2' of Scorpio, which means it covers 8° 42' in the
constellation of Anuradha. For this the equivalents in the valleys are 8°.7 ×
4.5 = 39.15. Therefore, the constellation in which Jupiter is situated, its
ending part is decreasing at 39.15.
On dividing it by 5, we get (39.15/5) = 7.83 or 7s 24°.9
= Scorpio 24°. 9 as the seed longitude of Jupiter.. Similarly calculate the
other planets and find out the seed and field spurs. It will be seen that a
male horoscope includes Jupiter, Sun and Venus while a female horoscope
includes Jupiter, Mars and Moon.
Verse 6. If Beej Sphuta is in an odd sign and an odd Navamsa and is
aspected by or associated with auspicious expressions, then it is considered
strong. If not, it is weak.
Shlok 7. If Kshetra Sphuta is in an even zodiac and an even Navamsha and
is aspected or associated with auspicious houses, then it becomes strong. If
not, it is weak.
Verse 8. If the classes occupied by these two are the lords of benefic
planets, then they are good; If possessed by sinners, they are evil. If the

 field of vision of Rahu is from Sphuta, then childlessness or loss of children
will be due to the wrath of Nag Devta. Gulika's favor or company causes
trouble for the Preeta. Shani indicates the sins committed in the previous
birth. Mars shows trouble from enemies or deities like Bhairav or
Chamundi.
Verse 9. Beej Sphuta should be calculated in the horoscope of a man.
Kshetra Sphuta should be done in the horoscope of the woman.
Terrifyingly, both Bija Spita and Kshetra Sphuta should be worked on.
These four spurts should be used in due time.
Verse 10. We have given a method to calculate seed and field spurs. Other
methods are also given here, only for confirmation obtained by consensus
of differing votes.
Verse 11. Beej Sphuta in the horoscope of a man is the sum of the
longitudes of Sun, Venus and Jupiter. Kshetra Spita in a woman's horoscope
is the sum of the longitudes of Moon, Mars and Jupiter. If beeja and kshetra
are in odd rasi and navamsha and even rasi and navamsha respectively, they
are said to be strong. If malefic or neutral planets join or aspect the same,
then their power decreases. again, unlucky
Planets in the 5th house from the seed and in the 9th house from the field
weaken them. Neutral planets weaken the seed and field, while auspicious
planets strengthen them.
Notes
Here in this verse the word "Parsu" means the ninth house from the Kshetra.
Kama Kiya "Te" (*) denotes malefic planets. "Athara" means the aspect or
association of seed and field spruta. Mercury is neutral and should not be
included in the auspicious planets.
Verse 12. Pay attention to the part ending in the valleys of the constellations
occupied by Bija and Kshetra. Divide the valleys and valleys by 5. The
longitude thus obtained are two springs, which are called bija sphuta and
kshetra sphuta. It is according to some (translation).

 Notes
In this regard a reference may be made to the comments under verse 5.
Verse 13. By applying the same rules as before, determine the parties to the
disputes and assess their strength. Have to do pentacle work. If this spark is
in the first, fourth, fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth house, then the child will be
born in the first part of his life. If he is in the 2nd, 8th or 11th house, then he
will have children in the middle of his life. If it is in the third, sixth and
twelfth house, then the child is born in the last part.
Shlok 14. If these are partially strong, but beneficial, then the person gets
the child after doing the necessary atonement (remedial measures).
Verse 15. Weakness of Bija and Kshetra is due to two reasons, i.e. (1)
internal and natural and (2) external. Internal weakness is due to the
disorder of the three houses of Vata, Pitta and Mucous. Its remedy is the
performance of medical treatment and other remedial measures. Since these
are due to sins committed in past lives, these remedies, such as chanting and
charity, in addition to medical treatment, if done properly, will ward off evil
and produce children. This is the opinion of the ancient sages.
Verse 16. If the trouble is external, it is due to the hidden attack of the
demons, yakshas and paisachas or the invisible effect of the curses of the
brahmins or the devas. After ascertaining the source of the trouble, the
requisite 'karma' or rituals should be performed.
Shlok 17. The question of issues can also be considered from the test of the
children's house.
Notes
How to make them work is given below.
Shlok 18. On multiplying the longitudes of the planets by 5, we get the
child planet Sphutas. The total sum of children Sun, child Moon and child
Jupiter and the result is child Trisfuta. If it falls in 3rd or 5th or 7th
Nakshatra from Trisphuta
The native's birth constellation, or the 88th or 108th quadrant from the
Moon, or the 6th or 8th or 12th house from the Ascendant, will not be a

 problem. Check the horoscope of husband and wife. If you get this yoga
then there will be no problem. However, if this yoga falls in one of the
horoscopes, then with appropriate remedial measures, the birth of a problem
is possible.

Shlok 19. If Trisfuta falls in the 3rd, 5th or 7th Nakshatra from the birth
Nakshatra or in the 88th or 108th quadrant from the Moon and if this
Nakshatra belongs to a male, then the male problem will end. If it's a female
star, the female issue will be over. If the child Mars and the child Shani fall
in the same trisphuta, then no problem will arise.
Notes
The 88th or 108th quarter from the original Moon gives similar results.
Shlokas 20 and 21. According to Santhana Surya or Santhana Moon or both
occupying a center from Trisfuta, an issue will arise for the first wife, or the
second wife, if he remarries, or after the second marriage. Jupiter or Venus
in a similar position indicates that the native will marry third and fourth
wife respectively, which will lead to both issues. Absence of problem will
be due to curse of Pitru or Nagas as Shani or Rahu is in 5th, 7th or 9th
position from Trisfuta. Remedies should be given on the basis of the
constellation of Trisfuta. If it comes in the eighth constellation from Venus,
then Durga should be worshipped. If it falls within four from Rohini, then
Gana Homa should be determined. If snake sacrifice is prescribed in seven
constellations from Pushya. And if Swati causes trisphuta within 8
nakshatras, then brahmins should be fed on the days ruled by Shravan
nakshatra.
Notes
These two verses are a bit confusing. However, as I understand them after
consulting Panikkar, a scholar, the following should be noted.
We have already learned how to reach the offspring Trisfuta (or Trisfuta as
mentioned in these two verses). This is achieved by a total of five times the

 longitudes of the Sun, Moon and Jupiter. (1) If this Trishuta star is in the
3rd, 5th or 7th position from the birth constellation; Or if it falls from the
position of the original Moon in the 88th or 108th quarter, the problem will
be over. The gender of the issue will be according to the male or female
nature of the trisphuta star.
By marrying up to 4 wives, the birth of children again becomes possible
which is impossible in the present social system. Therefore, in the use of
other conjunctions, one must use his skill and interpretive ability.
Verse 22. The following combinations indicate the extinction of the family:
(1) Malefix occupying 4th position; Venus in 7th and Moon in 10th; (2) All
are situated in Purushartha
first, fifth, eighth and twelfth houses; (3) All the malefic planets are situated
in the 4th, Mercury and Venus in the 7th and Jupiter in the 5th house.
Shlok 23. It is said in Sarvartha Chintamani that if there is any evil planet in
the ascendant, the Moon is in the 4th house and the lord of the ascendant is
in the 5th house and the lord of the 5th house is weak, then the family is
destroyed.
Verse 24. If there are sins in the 12th, 5th and 8th house from the ascendant;
If Jupiter and Moon are in the ascendant; If either Mars or Saturn is in the
7th house; If all Purusharthas occupy 4; Moon is in 5th position; And when
the malefic planets enter the first, fourth and twelfth house, the family
becomes extinct.
Notes
There are four combinations listed in this verse. A combination of these
must be present for the family to become extinct.
Verse 25. The family becomes extinct if there is sin in the 5th house and is
devoid of benefic aspect; The total number of points in the 5th house in
Sarvashtakvarga is not more than 25; The 5th house is an even sign; The
lord of the planet Jupiter is seated in the fifth house.
Notes
Four combinations are listed in this verse for the extinction of one's family.

 (1) Inauspicious effects in the 5th house, devoid of benefits;
(2) The total number of Bindus in the 5th house in Sarvashtakvarga is not
more than 25;
(3) 5th house is an even sign; And
(4) The lord of the constellation in which Jupiter is situated is in the fifth
house.
Verse 26. Some of the conjunctions are described in the last verse. If only
one combination is present, the absence of the problem is due to an
abdominal complaint; If there are two, then the trouble is due to evil forces;
If there is three, it is the result of these two causes. So remedial measures, if
done properly, can give problems. If all the yogas are combined, then the
person will not face any problem.
Verse 27. Under the following three conjunctions, there will be no birth of
issues:
(1) The lord of the Ascendant, the lord of the 5th house, Jupiter and the lord
of the 7th house are all very weak; (2) The lord of the 5th house from the
Ascendant, Moon and Jupiter are all devoid of auspicious sight,
(3) The fifth house has no beneficial aspect but is highly afflicted.
Verse 28. The 5th house is occupied by sinners; The lord of the 5th house is
debilitated and devoid of profit; Or Mars is in 7th position; Moon and
Venus intertwine. These combinations indicate the absence of children.
Shlok 29. If the waning moon is in the 5th house and the malefic planets are
in the 1st, 7th and 12th house, then the person has neither a wife nor a child.
Verse 30. If Jupiter, the lord of the Ascendant and Moon, 5th house, 7th
house is extremely weak; These and the 'Yama-Kantaka' are in the 6th, 8th
or 12th position; The fifth house is aspected by or associated with the planet
of sin; If sheer combinations are present; If the progeny date falls after the
8th day of the dark half of the moon; If the number of Bindus in the fifth

 house is less than Jupiter in Jupiter's Ashtvarga, then the person will be
Nirguna. He will not have any adopted son.
Notes
Shlok 27 to 30 outline combination where the birth of a child is denied.
These are:
1. Ascendant, Panchmesh, Jupiter and seventh lord are all weak.
2. If the Panchamesh, Moon and Jupiter related to the Ascendant do not get
any benefic aspect.
3. There is no auspicious aspect of fifth house, but suffering is sin.
4. The fifth house is the lord of the malefic planet.
5. The lord of the fifth house is debilitated and there is no sight of any
auspicious effect on him.
6. Mars is in the seventh house.
7. Moon and Venus are together (this combination seems ambiguous).
8. The waning moon is in the 5th house and the malefic planets are in the
1st, 7th and 12th house. This combination not only eliminates the issues but
also the wife.
9. Ascendant, the lord of Moon sign, Jupiter, fifth and seventh house are
extremely weak.
10. (9) Plus the factors given in Yamkantak are at 6th, 8th or 12th position.
11. The fifth house is aspected or related to the malefic planet.
12. Kinnar yogas exist.
Readers are referred to the Notes under Chapter XVIII Verse 146.
13. Sanatan Tithi falls after the 8th Tithi of Shukla Paksha of the fortnight.
14: Jupiter in the fifth house from Jupiter has less number of points in
Ashtakvarga. In combinations 9 to 14, the adopted child is also excluded.
At least some of these combinations are bound to appear in the chart of the
childless.

 couple
Let's see which combinations listed above are found in this chart.
Conjunction (7) Ascendant lord Mars however is in the midst of sinners
along with Ketu in the 11th house; 5th lord Jupiter is in debilitation without
any benefic aspect, Karak Jupiter is also weak without benefic aspect.
Seventh lord Venus is also in enemy sign without any auspicious sight.
The conjunction (2) is partially present as Jupiter which is the 5th lord from
both the Ascendant and Moon and Venus (5th lord from Jupiter) does not
get any benefic aspect.
The chart above is of a native who died childless.
Combination (3) is also good as Rahu in 5th position is without any benefic
aspect.
The conjunctions (4) and (5) apply here as well. Combination (7) applies
but its logic is not very clear.
A large number of these combinations that appear in the chart explain the
absence of offspring.
Verse 31. If the lord of the Ascendant and Moon is strong; When they,
Jupiter, and the 5th and 7th houses and Yamkantak are favorably disposed;
When the fifth house is well situated; When Jupiter has a good number of
points in the fifth house in the ashtak-varga, when the child's date falls in
the Shukla Paksha, then the birth of a child is indicated.
Verse 32. If the combinations given above are found to be mixed, then by
appropriate remedial measures the children may.
In verse 33. Santana Tithi can also be seen in the horoscope and the
possibilities for children can be ascertained. Such is the opinion of the
sages. So how to do this is described.
Verse 34. It should be recognized that at sunrise each day the (imaginary)
Sun and the (imaginary) Moon are located at the end of Aries and the
middle of Sagittarius, respectively. It is believed that the Sun moves

 backward and the Moon moves forward at the rate of 50 Vghtis in each
zodiac.
Verse 35. Multiply the longitude of the Sun and the Moon calculated
according to the above method by 5 and the position of the child Sun and
the child Moon is obtained. After that, the child has to be subtracted from
the Sun to get the date of the child.
Santana Moon. If the date falls in the Shukla Paksha, then the child is born.
Notes
Determination of child Sun and child Moon: Method:
35 d 40 vegh = 2140 ghati after sunrise.
(a) Divide the time of birth (in valleys from sunrise) by 50.
(b) Quotient – X.
(c) subtract the multiples of 12 from x to get y.
(d) 13 signs – Y = Sun.
(e) Surya x 5 = Hear progeny
(f) y + 8 zodiac signs 15 degrees = moon
(g) Moon x 5 = Santana Moon
(h) child moon - child sun = child date Example: time of birth or question =
35-40 valleys from sunrise.
35 d 40 vegh = 2140 ghati after sunrise. (a) 2140/50 = 42 40/50 (b) X = 42
signifies 24 degrees.
On removing the multiples of 12 from x, we get
(c) y = 6 after removing the multiples of the sign 24° 12.
(d) 13 Rashis - 6 Rashi 24° = Sun, i.e. Sun = 6 Rashi 6 degrees.
(e) Santana Surya = Surya x 5 = 6 Rashi 6° x 5 = 30 Rashi 30°
= 6 zodiac 30 degrees = Libra 30 degrees

 (f) 6 signs 24° + 8 signs 15° = Moon, i.e. Moon = 15s 9° 3s 9° (g) Santana
Moon = Moon x 5 = 3s 9° x 15
= 4s 15" = Leo 15°. (A) Child date = Leo 15° - Libra 30° = 135°- 210°
= 285° or Santana date will be the 24th or 9th date of darkness.
Verse 36. If the child date falls in the dark half of the lunar month then no
problem will arise but a son will be adopted. This principle applies to both
birth and horoscope.
Shlok 37. If the waning Moon is in the Ascendant, Jupiter is set, in the sign
of Saturn and in the Sin Triangle, then the father of this issue will die before
birth. The child will be happy and long. If Mercury is in the 5th house with
the sinner and the sinner is in the 11th, or 5th, or 1st or 4th house, the father
can only live to see the birth of the child.
Notes
Obviously the father will not live long.
Verse 38. (a) Mars in the Ascendant, Moon in the 8th and Sun in the
Nirguna signs; (b) Jupiter in 8th house, Mars in 12th house, Saturn in Lagna
and others
The exit sign is the 5th house; (c) Sin in the 5th house from Jupiter, many
planets in the Ascendant and Moon in the 12th. The above three
combinations indicate the birth of issues in old age.
Notes
The nirguna or the least of the signs are Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio.
Shlok 39. Decreasing Moon in the ascendant, inauspicious in the ascendant
or fourth house, planets other than auspicious in the triangle indicate the
posthumous birth of the child.
Shlok 40. When a sinner enters the fifth house which is not his own zodiac
sign, and which has no aspect of strong beneficence, the child dies. When

 the 5th house is also the lord of the 8th house, the child dies. If Mars is in
the fifth house, then all the children die with birth. If Mars is aspected on
Jupiter, then only the first birth will die - if Pisces is in the fifth house and is
with Jupiter and is aspected by Saturn, then the child will also die.
Notes
A sinner should occupy the 5th house, which should not be the sinner's own
sign. It should not achieve the aspect of strong profit. Children will die
under this combination. If the lord planet of 5th and 8th house is in 5th
house then there is loss of children. The position of Mars in the fifth house
favors death at the time of the birth of a child. If Mars gets the aspect of
Jupiter then the first number will be saved. If Jupiter is placed in Pisces and
Saturn is aspected, the child will die.
Shlok 41. When the lord of the 5th house is in the sinful Navamsa, is weak
and delusional and is visible from the sinners or is in the dashas, then one
should predict the loss of the child.
Note 6th, 8th and 12th house are dusty.
Shlok 42. If the lord of Drakana is occupied by lord of Navamsa and is
occupied by lord of 12th associates or sees 5th house or its lord, the
children will die.
Notes
The combination is somewhat rounded (a) Take the lord of the 12th house;
(b) see which Navamsa he occupies; (c) Find the Drakana in which this
Navamsa Swami (as in B) is placed. This Drakana lord should not have
vision or relation with 5th or 5th lord. For example, Aquarius is the Lagna
and the 12th lord Shani is in the Taurus Navamsa. Say the lord of this
Navamsa, that is, Venus is in the direction of Aries. Then if the lord of this
Drakan zodiac, Mars has any relation with the fifth house or the fifth house,
then the child dies.
Shlok 43. The death of children should be predicted even when the lord of
the 5th house is set and is involved in the cruel sixth month or is afflicted by
sinners.

 Shlok 44. If the child is the lord of the fifth house from the ascendant and
the children are the masters of Saturn and Mercury or are associated with
Saturn, Mercury and the Moon or have a vision on them, then the person
will have to adopt the child. If the lord of the fifth house is also strong, then
the person has problems after the adoption of a child. The child ascendant is
obtained by multiplying the longitude of the birth ascendant by 5.
Notes
According to some, the fifth house from the birth ascendant and the original
Guru should also be considered.
Verse 45. When the lord of the fifth house is in the ninth sign of Saturn and
is in conjunction with Mercury and Saturn, then the person will adopt a
child. When the lord of the fifth house is in the navamsha of Saturn and
Jupiter and Venus are in their respective zodiacs, then the person gets a
child. After adopting the wife's case. If there is a contribution of planets in
the sign of Saturn or Navamsa from Jupiter in the fifth house from Jupiter
in the Ashtakvarga of Jupiter, even then adoption should be predicted.
Verse 46. A strong advantage in the 5th house, unless given by the lord of
the 5th house, can only give an adopted issue.

 Some special yogas of Putrasthan

Verse 47. When Saturn is in the fifth which is in Cancer, the birth of sons is
indicated. When Sun, Mars and Venus are situated equally, a son will be
born from the second wife. When the Moon and Jupiter are in the fifth
house, only girls are born. If Mercury is in the fifth house then the chances
are less.
Notes
The verses take into account the results of various planets in the 5th house
which should be Cancer. If (a) Saturn is in the fifth house then there is a
possibility of problem; (6) Sun, Mars and Venus — Birth of a child from the
second wife; (c) Moon and Jupiter - female issues only; and (d) Mercury
alone - the chances of getting a child are less. (d) and . About
(c) Some people believe that the number of female children will outnumber
the male issues. According to some pundits, Cancer occurring in the fifth
house is applicable only to Saturn and Mercury. For other planets, the fifth
house can be any zodiac sign.
Shlok 48. If any sin is in the 5th position, which should be his own zodiac
sign, then the native will get many children, but they cannot survive. But
the profits thus disposed of will give the opposite result. Being in the fifth
house of Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio, there are very few children. If the
Moon captures these, then there will be no problem. if the moon is
pervasive
In the fourth or fifth house which belongs to Virgo, female issues will be
born.
Notes
Even if the fifth house is of self, the sin there indicates the death of the
child. If the benefice is in the 5th position, it is their own sign, it indicates
many children. The signs of Taurus, Leo, Virgo and Scorpio are called
Alpaputra signs. When any of these fifths occurs, very few babies are born.

 In any one of these signs, the Moon in the fifth house negates the child. If
the girl child is in the fourth or fifth house and the moon is situated there,
then the birth of daughters is indicated.
Verse 49. When the Moon is in an odd sign and the Sun is in an odd
Navamsa, there will be problems. If the lord of the seventh house is in the
fifth house, then both wife and children are destroyed. If the strong lord of
the seventh house is in the 5th house and the lord of the 8th is in the 7th
house then there is a problem. Similarly, if the lords of 1st and 5th are
interchangeable, there will be a problem; But if the lord of the first house is
Mercury, then there will be no problem.
Verse 50. When the first house is in even sign, in which there are squares of
Moon and Venus and both these planets are aspected, then the child will be
female.
Shlok 51. When the fifth house is in an odd sign and the lord of the fifth
house is in the odd Navamsa, then all the issues will be male.
Verse 52. When the 5th house is an even sign and the lord of the 5th house
is in an even navamsa, the issue is a female. When the fifth house is even
and the fifth house lord is impotent, the child is impotent.
Note neuter signs are Gemini, Virgo, Capricorn and Aquarius.
Shlok 53. If an even planet is in its own zodiac in the fifth house, then many
problems will arise. If there are two inauspicious planets in the fifth house,
then many children are born.
Shlok 54. If the lord of 2nd house is aspected by Jupiter in 5th house and is
strong then problems arise.
Verse 55. If the lord of the ascendant and the lord of the 5th house are in the
quadrant and the lord of the 2nd is strong, the birth of issues can be
predicted.
Verse 56. If the lord of the 5th house is in the possession of the lord of the
Navamsa, or is associated with or aspected by an auspicious person, then a
child is born.
Shlok 57. When the fifth house is strong from the Ascendant or the Moon
and is associated with auspiciousness or is aspected by it or the fifth lord is

 without any trouble, then the child will be born soon.
Verse 58. When the lord and master of the 5th house is strong, not
associated with the lord of the 6th, 8th or 12th house, is free from
combustion, and Duritamsa, the birth of a child can be predicted.
Notes
Duritmas are formed from the second and third phases of Samara
constellations.
Verse 59. When Mars is in 5th position with Aries, Leo, Scorpio or Pisces
and aspected by Jupiter, birth of an issue can be predicted.
Verse 60. When Jupiter, Sun and Mars, the lords of 5th house, are in odd
navams in odd signs, male children will be born. If the lord of Moon, Venus
and fifth house is in the same house then the problem will be female.
Verse 61. If the fifth house and its lord are strong, then the child is longlived. If the sinner is the owner of the house, the sons will be the sinners. If
it's weird, the kids will be cruel. If the lord of the fifth house is auspicious,
and the Guru is in their exalted houses and has benefic classes of their own,
then the children born will be cultured, live long and prosper.
Verse 62. The general condition of the children will depend on the mental
attitude of the parents at the time of impregnation. If they are happy and
free from worries, the children will also lead a happy life. If the breath
comes out of the nostrils of the father at the time of impregnation, then the
life of the child is long. If there is no breath, the child's life will be short.
Shlok 63. If the lord of the fifth house and the planet Jupiter are in
conjunction or are aspected by sinners, then the children will be either
deformed or ill.
verse 64. The lords of the 1st and 5th are interchangeable; These two lords
share in each other, and watch over each other; These three yogas indicate
the birth of a child. In the horoscope of a woman, the 'natal' has to be found
from the 5th and the child from the 9th. If the fourth house in a woman's

 horoscope is associated with any auspicious house, then childbirth does not
take place.
Verse 65. If the longitude of Jupiter and the fifth house are in the square of
Jupiter and the fifth house is aspected by Jupiter, then the person will have
children from his wife. The fifth house can be calculated from both the
Ascendant and the Moon.
Verse 66. If the lord of the ascendant and the fifth house are mutual friends,
then the father and son will be of good nature towards each other. If they
are enemies, father and son will be mutually ill-wishers. And if these
masters are neutral, then the relationship will be indifferent.
Verse 67. If the lords of the Ascendant and the 5th house keep an eye on
each other or change each other's house, the son will serve his father
dutifully.
Shlok 68. If the lord of the 5th house is in the ascendant or has an eye on it
or the ascendant is in the fifth house or has a vision, then the son will also
be obedient to the father.
Shlok 69. If the lord of the fifth house Mars and Rahu are aspecting the fifth
house from the Moon or the Ascendant, then the son will always abuse the
father.
Shlok 70. When the lord of the navamsa is in the ascendant in the
possession of the lord of the 5th house, then the lord of the navamsha is in
the 5th house in the possession of the lord of the ascendant, and
The lord of Navamsa is in a center in the possession of Brihaspati, the sages
declare that the native will have children.
ritualistically
Shlok 71. When the fifth house is either owned or associated with or
aspected by auspicious persons, there will be problems. If otherwise, there
will be no problem.
Verse 72. When the fifth house is benefited by the Ascendant or Moon or
Jupiter, the father will be greatly benefited by the son.

 Verse 73. The product obtained by multiplying the longitude of the 5th
house (signalless) by the amount of aspect in terms of minutes (in terms of
shashtiyams) is to be divided by 200. The quotient indicates the number of
children. The longitude of the 5th house (signless) is reduced to minutes,
multiplied by the aspect quantity of sins. The product is divided by 200.
The quotient indicates the number of issues that die.
Notes
While interpreting this shloka, I must submit that I have not found any
satisfactory result in applying this shloka to practical horoscope. Drishti
Shasthyansh is the collective aspect cast by all the planets on a house. The
method of its removal is explained in detail with examples in my book
Graha and Bhava Bal.
Convert the longitude (negating sign) of the 5th house to minutes. Call it X.
Take Drishti Shashthyansh or the amount of vision on the fifth house. Call
it Y. Multiply x by y and call the product z . Divide z by 200. The quotient
indicates the number of issues arising. The amount of beneficial aspects
denotes the number of issues alive while the amount of harmful aspects
denotes the number of issues that died. Some pundits are of the opinion that
z should first be divided by 60 and the quotient should be divided again by
200. I can't be too safe for this principle to work.
Verse 74. The absolute number of Navams of the lord of the 5th house gives
the number of children. Male issues are to be ascertained from the Navams
of male planets and female issues from female planets. If malefic planets
are in even signs, the child will die; Female planets placed in contrasting
signs show similar results. If the Navamsa lord is strong, then the problems
will remain for a long time.
Shlok 75. If the Navamsa lord is strong by being exalted or by occupying
his or her friendly houses, the issues will survive for a long time. If these
lords are weak or burn or occupy enemy places, the child dies.
Notes

 Lord of navamsa lord of 5th house and lord of
navamsa
Which is the 5th Falls to be considered.
Verse 76. The number of Bindus found in the fifth house from Jupiter in his
Ashtakvarga Kundli shows the number of children. Points contributed by
unfriendly or debilitated planets or those in combustion should be excluded.
The points contributed by an exalted or retrograde planet should be tripled.
For Vargottam or a planet in your house, the point should be doubled. The
point contributed by the masculine planets gives the male, and the female,
the female.
Notes
A prastha ashtakvarga (see my book Ashtakavarga System Prediction
System) cast for Jupiter shows the number of points contributed by each
planet. When this is known, one can find out whether the points given by
benefics, sins etc., and whether such planets are exalted or debilitated, etc.
This combination is explained in detail in my book on Ashtakvarga with an
illustration.
In chart 1, the 5th sign from Jupiter is Libra. Libra has 6 points, Saturn,
Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon and is the giver of the Ascendant. Of these,
Saturn is in enemy sign. Venus is in weakness. Hence, after subtracting 2
points, the remainder is 4. The sun is the best. Sun's double contribution (2).
Mercury is Vargottam. His contribution also doubled (2). Now the total will
be 8. Venus and Moon are female. Although Mercury is a hijra, it can be
considered a malefic in a malefic zodiac with the male planet Sun. So the
total number of children will be 8 - 6 men and 2 women.
Verse 77. Decrease the number of Navamshas ending in the 5th house
whose lord is enemy sign or weak; Number of finished Navams of the lord
of

 5th loan whose owner is weak or is in enemy houses; Number of planets
aspecting fifth house: These give the number of issues.
Notes
This verse has been translated without straining or stretching the original.
In the 5th house, 8 Navamshas have ended. Saturn is in enemy sign and 7
Navamshas have ended in his case. Sun, Moon and Jupiter are in
debilitation and have crossed 2, 4 and 0 Navamsa respectively. i.e. 7 + 2 + 4
+ 0 = 13.
The 5th lord Mercury has covered the 6 Navamshas. From this we have to
subtract 13. No planet is in 5th position.
The first two examples have to be ignored because the figure to be deducted
is less than the figure to be deducted. Applying this rule from 5th house
Balance of Shani Dasha: 3 years, 3 months and 18 days. Moon Lagna, the
first and second positions have the same result. However, Mars and
Mercury aspect the 5th house, that is, the 2 planets.
Taking the average of the issues as per the calculations of the Lagna and
Chandra Lagna, we will get 0 + 2/2 = 1. The native can expect 1 mark.
Verse 78. The number of Rasami secured by Jupiter and the 5th lord gives a
clue of the number of issues. The method of calculating Rasmi taught to me
by my guru is given below.
Verse 79. The maximum number of rays allotted to Sun, Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are 10, 9, 5, 5, 7, 8 and 5 respectively.
actual longitude. If the remainder is greater than 6s (or 180°),
Subtract this from 12s (or 360°). Multiply this by the rasi of the planets and
divide the product by 6s (or 180°). If the planet is retrograde or set then its
contribution should be increased or decreased.
Notes
Rasmi are the rays that each planet receives when they are in a deep exalted
state. The ratio of good or bad signs of a planet depends on the amount it

 gets in its credit. The higher the number, the more beneficial the results.
The Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn receive 10, 9, 5,
5, 7, 8 and 5 rays respectively in a deep exalted state. In deep weakness, the
number of rituals is zero. This is what Kalyanvarma says in his immortal
work Saravali. The same idea is expressed in the works of Mani, Maya and
Badarayana. The total number of Rasami received by a planet is always 49.
While some other authors believe that the total number is 49, they believe
that each planet gets 7 Rasmi regardless of its nature. But this idea has not
found approval from Badrayana and other great writers, whose allocation of
Rasmi is based on the inherent nature and characteristics of the planets. Sun
is the brightest planet and consequently it attains 10 Rasmi deep exalted
state. The Moon, Venus and Jupiter come forth in their degree of luminosity
and hence receive 8, 8 and 7 rays respectively.
A planet which moves from debilitated to exalted is said to be benefic in
Rasami. When the planet is moving from exalted to debilitated, the opposite
is good. If a planet is in between these two points, then the number of
Rasmi can be obtained according to the ratio.
First of all, Rasmi-Ach is obtained by subtracting the debilitation point
from the longitude of the planet. If the remainder is greater than 180°, then
subtract it from 360°, and the Rasmi-Arc of the planet is obtained. The
number of rays assigned to each planet is when it is at its deepest high
point, the full number of rays taken when the rasmi-arc is 180° and the
number of rays indicated by the rasmi-arc (sphuta-rasmi) be between 0. °
and 180° are found in the ratio:- 180° : prim-arc :: the inscribed rays of the
planet : sphuta- rasmi.
Suppose the longitude of Mercury is 180°33'. By applying the above rules,
we get the Rasmi-Arch of Mercury as follows:
180° 33' - 345° (weakness point) = 195° 33' = 164° 27' = primordial arc
164° 27' x 5/180°
= 4.56 Mercury's sparkle ritual.
In this way the sphut-rasams for other planets should be traced.

 According to the position of the planet in the Kundli, the Sphuta-Rasti
increases or decreases. If the planet Mitra is in the dwadashansha, then this
number should be doubled; If it is in its own Navamsa, the number should
be tripled; If high or in your house, in addition to being retrograde, the
number needs to be tripled. If the planet is in enemy or debilitated
Dwadshansha, sfuta-rasmi should be reduced by sixteenth part; Except
Saturn and Venus, if any other planet is in combustion, then the sphatrasami of such a planet becomes void. If a planet is going to be retrograde,
then its sphuta-rami gets reduced by one-eighth. After the completion of
haraus (reduction) and bharan (addition) add the rasis of all the planets
together.
If the total number becomes less than 10, the native earns his livelihood by
begging and similar acts, becomes unlucky and roams aimlessly. If the total
rays are between 10 to 15, the result will be good character, righteous
inclination and increase in religious learning. If between 15 and 20, famous,
righteous and wealthy; If between 20 and 25, fair appearance, brave,
majestic and dignified; Serving kings and nobles if the number of rays is
between 25 and 30; If 31, 32, 33 and 34, then the result will be high rank,
great influence and immense wealth; 35 to 39 indicates princely power,
sovereignty over vast lands and immense wealth; Above 40, there is a very
high Raja Yoga and the person attains a high position like that of kings and
emperors.
Shlok 80. If the planet is retrograde or exalted, then the number of rays
should be tripled. If the planet is in self or friend Navamsa, then the number
has to be doubled. In an unfriendly or weak sign, reduce the rays by 1/16th.
If all the rituals are finished in combustion but Venus and Saturn are in
combustion then only half has to be removed. Jupiter or the lord of the fifth
house, the lord who has more rituals, contributes to the number of children
of the native.
Verse 81. Of the methods to find out the number of offspring discussed
above, the one that gives the largest number can be taken if the lord of the
5th is strong. The lowest marks he gives can be noted when the lord of the
5th house is weak.

 Time: Birth of children
Shlok 82. If the lord of the 5th house is near the 5th house or near the
Ascendant, then the person is very small. With the fifth house lord being
Kendra, Panpara or Apoklima, the child will be born in young, middle or
old age respectively.
Notes
The centers are the first, fourth, seventh and tenth houses. Panapara is the
second, fifth, eighth and eleventh house, Apoklima is the third, sixth, ninth
and twelfth house.
Verse 83. In the main and sub-periods of the lord of the ascendant, the lord
of the 5th house, Jupiter, the lord of the ninth house, the birth of a child can
happen; In the possession of Jupiter, the lord of Navamsa; lord of the
seventh; the occupant of the 5th house; And the planet aspecting the fifth
house.
Verse 84. The birth of an issue can be predicted when Jupiter transits any
one of the following signs: The zodiac occupied by the lord of the 5th house
from the Ascendant; Navamsa zodiac is occupied by the lord of the 5th; The
sign captured by Gulika; Gulika's Navamsa sign; Sign to Trinal House and
in possession of Gulika Navansh Rasi. Of the signs mentioned above,
Jupiter has more dotted signs in its Ashtakvarga. The lord of the fifth house
from Moon and Jupiter should also be considered.
Notes
The period of child birth is ascertained by considering Jupiter's transit in a
zodiac - one of the following, which has the highest number of points in
Jupiter's Ashtakvarga. Indications to consider are:
(1) The zodiac sign of the lord of the 5th house from the ascendant,
(2) Navamsa amount in the possession of this owner,
(3) The sign of the lord of the 5th house from the Moon,
(4) Navamsa amount in the possession of this owner,

 (5) The sign of the lord of the fifth house from Jupiter,
(6) Navamsa Rashi is in the possession of this owner,
(7) the sign in possession of Gulika,
(8) Gulika's Navamsa Rashi and
(9) Trinal houses of Rasi and Navamsa Rasi occupied by Gulika. According
to some, the trinity of the above nine zodiac signs should be considered.
This shloka provides a lot of scope for a research-minded astrologer to find
out the year of birth based on the transit of Jupiter.
Shlok 85. When Jupiter, the lord of the 5th house, the lord of the Ascendant
and the lord of the 5th house, transits from the Moon-sign in the 5th house
or the residence of the 5th house lord or Trinetra places. Both of these, the
child will be born. When the lords of the 1st, 5th and 7th houses transit in
the above mentioned signs, then also problems can arise.
Verse 86. We have seen that the Bindu in the 5th house from Jupiter, in his
Ashtakvarga chart, represents the number of children. Consider the stronger
of the two signs
- The sign occupied by the planet which has contributed the Bindu or its
Navamsa Rashi. If this lord is in the first Drakana, then the child will be
born when the moon will transit in the sign of the lord of its navamsa sign.
If he resides in the second Drakana, then the child will be born in the 5th
house from the top; If it is situated in the third Drakana, then the child will
be born when the Moon transits from above in the 9th sign. Multiply the
exhausted exponents of the planet in Drakkana by 135 and divide the
product by 1800. It gives components
went to the constellation. The result gives the nakshatra in which the child
will be born.
Notes
If the planet occupies the first Drakana, then in the second Drakana, remove
the Rasi, and in 10 degrees and in the third Drakana, remove the Rasi and

 20 degrees. Convert the remainder to minutes, multiply by 135 and divide
by 1800. If the remainder is divided by 5, the number of nakshatra padas
that ends will be obtained and in the next pada, the child will be born.
Shlok 87. When the Moon is situated in the fifth house or transits in the
zodiac or Navamsha of the auspicious houses that have a sight on it; 5th
strong and well located lord; And other planets which are strong enough to
give progeny, there will be birth of an issue. Out of the above zodiac signs,
the fifth house and the Navamsa also give children.
Shlok 88. We have described in detail the various bhavas, their intrinsic
qualities or defects. They can also be used efficiently in this regard.
Shlok 89. Man has to repay three debts in his life. The debt of the ancestors
can be redeemed only by issue. Results alone cannot satisfy them. So the
birth of a son is very important and hence a lot is said about it.

 7th house according to birth horoscope
Verse 1. When there is perfect agreement between Kundli (Jataka) and Hori
(Prasana) in terms of results, things can be predicted with greater accuracy.
That's why I am telling here how to read the life-career of one's wife by
checking the horoscope.
Notes
The details of reading about the wife with the help of Prasanna are given in
Chapter XVII.
Verse 2. Details about the issues have been described in the previous
chapter. Unmarried people may not have any legitimate issue. They are not
capable of performing any of the actions mentioned in the Shruti and
Smritis. Married people have to. Therefore marriage is absolutely necessary
for the sake of the issue of marriage and to enable one to perform all the
prescribed deeds. The ancient sages have described them in detail and
drawing conclusions from them, I write in my own way.
Verse 3. From 7th house, 7th house lord, 7th house planet, 7th house planet
and Venus, everything should be known about the wife.
Verse 4. The character of the wife depends on the nature of the lord of the
seventh house. The nature of the signs starting with Aries is given below
with reference to the 7th house.
Verse 5. If the seventh house is Aries in the husband's horoscope, then the
wife will be fond of going to temples; If Taurus, generous in giving food;
Gemini - Keeps clean and tidy all the utensils in the house; Cancer - fond of
bathing; Leo Religious inclination of mind; Virgo, inclined to store
beautiful utensils and sweet perfumes; Libra, clever in speech; Scorpio,
clever in cooking; Sagittarius, fond of listening to mythology; Capricorn,
fond of soft bedding and light clothing (sparsana sukha); Aquarius engaged
in the storage of grain and corn; And Pisces, who collects bronze vessels,
sweet in words and skilled in fine arts.

 Verse 6. When the 7th house is weak and afflicted by sinners, is neither
aspected nor connected to it; or lord of 7th or lord of 1st; The lord of 7th
and Venus is in debilitated or enemy navamsha or is in combustion or is
associated with or without any advantage or lord of ascendant or it is in 6th,
8th or 12th house, the person will not marry. Even if he gets married, the
wife will not live long.
Shlok 7. If Mars is in the seventh house, then the husband remains separate
from the wife.
Or she will die. If Shani in the seventh house without any auspicious
relation casts a vision on Mars, then the wife dies. If the seventh house is
Capricorn and Jupiter is on it or the seventh house is Scorpio and Venus is
in it, then the wife dies. If Taurus is in the seventh sign and Mercury is
situated there, then his first wife dies.
Verse 8. If Saturn is in 7th house with Pisces, if Jupiter is in 7th house like
Virgo; or if there is a strong sinner in the fourth house; Or if the lord of the
8th house or the lord of the 5th house is in the 7th house; The wife will die.
If Sun and Venus are in the 5th, 7th or 9th house, then there is a defect in
the organs of the wife.
Shlok 9. If Venus comes in the middle of the dosha without any auspicious
effect, then the life of the person may be in trouble with the wife or he may
die. If the malefic planet Venus is in the fourth and eighth house without
any auspicious effect, then there may be some danger or accident to the
wife. If Sun and Rahu are in the seventh house, then the person wastes all
his wealth on women.
Verse 10. If Venus is in a moving sign, in the midst of sinners, and aspected
by or with Saturn, the wife will be excommunicated.
Shlok 11. If Venus is in or associated with or aspected by the Rashi or
Navamsa of Mars, then the native's wife shows mercy to the cruel person.
Verse 12. If Venus is in the sign or Navamsa of Saturn, or is aspected by or
conjuncts Saturn; Or Venus is in its debilitated sign or Navamsa, the wife
will be of low race.

 Shlok 13. If Venus is more sinful in the seventh house than Venus in
Ashtakvarga and Gulika is in Trinetra from Venus, then the wife dies soon.
Verse 14. If Venus is in the sign of Mars or Sun or is aspected by either of
these; Or if Venus is fiery, then the death of the wife will be due to fire.
Notes
The enumeration of ghosts is given in Chapter XVI.
Verse 15. If Rahu is afflicted in conjunction with Venus, Mandi and Trishul
or quadrangular house, then the wife dies due to snakebite.
Notes
Here Venus is considered to be a triangle (triangle) or quadrangle (centre).
Shlok 16. If Venus joins Shani and is sinner with Venus in the eighth house,
then the wife gets unnatural death. Due to Venus being in a quadrangular
sign, death in the dasha of a bird or in a water sign will be quadruple or due
to bird or water. If Venus is in the water sign with the Moon, then the wife
drowns.
Notes
The first part of Virgo, Sagittarius, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius are human
or bidirectional signs.
The latter are the water signs of Pisces, Cancer and Capricorn.
The latter half of Sagittarius, the first half of Capricorn, Leo, Aries and
Taurus are quadruple signs. Vrischika is a Keeta or Keeta Rasi.
Verse 17. If Venus is in conjunction with the Sun, the wife will be afflicted
by ghosts (or hobgoblins) despite being born in a reputed family; With the
Moon, better bred and cultured than the husband; with Mars, haunted by
demons and will have a lover; With Brihaspati, haunted by Vidyadharas,
though virtuous in all actions; And with Mercury, educated, good-natured
and beautiful.

 Shlok 18. If Venus conjuncts with Saturn, then there will be trouble with
Gandharvas, will be loved by mean people and will possess bad temper and
deceptive habits; With Rahu or Ketu, fond of lowly people and defect in
any organ; With Gulika and other tertiary planets, accidents lead to sudden
death; With Ardhaprahar there will be death due to prolonged illness.
Shlok 19. If there is a point of Sun in the seventh house from Venus in the
Ashtakvarga of Venus, then the wife will be as dear to him as life; The point
contributed by Moon, he would agree with his mind; If always engaged in
auspicious works by Mars; If by Mercury, very faithful to the husband; If
by Jupiter, endowed with good children; If it is by Venus, then one should
be proficient in the art of enjoyment; And if it is by Shani, then serve him
sincerely as a servant.
Notes
The point of Venus in Venus Asbtakvarga never falls from it in the seventh
house. Hence the only construction possible is that the point has to be "7th
house from the Ascendant instead of Venus".
Shlok 20. If Jupiter or Venus is in the seventh house, then his wife will be
of his own caste. All the details about the physical characteristics of the
wife like colour, height, etc. ., must be ensured.
Shlok 21. Venus, the lord of the 7th house and the more powerful the planet
placed in the 7th house, will indicate the color, nature, caste etc. of the wife.
2
Shlok 23. When the lord of the 7th house is benefic and there is a aspect of
auspicious planets or there is a relation with them, or the strong planets are
in the 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th house from the sign of the 7th house lord, then
the woman can marry her husband and her husband. love children
Otherwise the wife will become infertile and sick.
Notes
If the lord of 7th house is sinner or aspected by sinners, or sinner or weak
beneficiary is in 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th house from the sign of 7th house

 lord, then wife will be ill and ill. barren.
Shlok 24. If there is a lord or benefic house in the 7th house and the seventh
house is dominant; Or if the lord of the seventh house and Venus are well
placed, then the person gets the good fortune of getting a good wife.
Verse 25. If the lord of the seventh house is very strong, then the person will
marry a girl from a wealthy family. If he is weak, he will marry a poor
family and the wife will not be good.
Verse 26. If the lord of the seventh house is in the middle of auspicious
houses or is seen or is hurt, then the person gets a good wife and children.
Shlok 27. When the lord of the seventh house or Venus is in an auspicious
sign or is in the ninth of any auspicious house and the lord of the tenth
house is strong, then the person will marry a woman of good qualities.
Shlok 28. If the seventh, the lord of the seventh or Venus is strong and has
the Guru's vision on it, then a devoted wife is found.
Shlok 29. If the lord of the seventh house or the Sun is aspected by Venus or
Mercury and the lord of the seventh house is in conjunction with the Guru,
then the wife will be pure and virtuous.
Shlok 30. If the lord of the seventh house is in the quadrant and has
auspicious vision or is situated in an auspicious zodiac and auspicious
navamsha, then the wife will be an embodiment of purity.
Shlok 31. If the lord of the seventh house or the Sun is in a sinful zodiac
and inauspicious Navamsa, or is aspected by or associated with sin, then the
inclination of the wife will be bad.
Verse 32. When Rahu or Ketu is in the seventh house; when it is seen by
sinners; When the seventh house falls in a sinful Navamsa, the wife is a
sinner, has a tendency to poison the husband, has a bad reputation and will
be of a quarrelsome nature.
Verse 33. If Venus is in the seventh house, then the husband is erotic and
emotional. If auspicious results are strong in the seventh house, then he is
going to love his wife. If Mars is in the seventh house, then he falls in love

 with many women. If there is Saturn, then it will tend to women of lower
class. If the Sun is in the seventh house, then he loves the wives of others.
Shlok 34. If the lord of the ascendant and the seventh house are friends,
then the family members of the wife will be friendly towards the native. If
the lord of the seventh and the ascendant are enemies, then the wife and her
family members will be enemies towards him.
Shlok 35. If the lord of the Ascendant is very strong and the lord of the
seventh is in the auspicious Navamsa, which is in auspicious bhavas, is in
the Vaishishkansh or is of exalted, then the person will marry in a high
family.
Shlok 36. When the lord of the ascendant is weak and the lord of the 7th
house is in the enemy sign and is weak or the enemy is navamsa, is set, and
is associated with sinners, then the person will marry a girl from a low
family. more than you
Shlok 37. When the Ascendant is a common sign and when the Moon and
the lord of the seventh house are in the same signs, or their Navamshas are
in the same signs, when the two planets are in the 11th house and the
transgender planets are in the 7th house, the person will remarry. . When
Sun and Mars are in the 7th house, or in their own Navamsa in the 7th
house, he will have only one wife, although he can marry multiple women.
Shlok 38. If the lord of the seventh (ascendant and moon) and Venus are
strong and are in favorable houses, then the person will marry three women.
If any two of these are strong, he will marry two women, and if only one is
strong, he will marry only one. When the lord of the seventh or Venus is
exalted or when more than two planets are in the seventh, he can marry
three or more women. The number of wives can be calculated from the
number of Navamshas completed by the lord of the seventh house.
Shlok 39. When the seventh house is strong, when Venus and the seventh
lord are exalted, or are in their own signs, or Vargottam or exalted
Navamsa, the person will marry another woman.

 Notes
In verses 37, 38 and 39 combinations are given for more than one wife. In
all civilized countries, the order of the day is monogamy. This implies that
when a chart indicates more than one spouse, it can happen under the
following conditions: (a) death of the spouse, (b) divorce, (c) secret
marriage, law or not approved by the society.
(c) we can include certain groups such as Muslims whose laws allow more
than one wife at the same time. Even among Muslims there are men who
have married and remained faithful to their spouses without taking
advantage of their laws, which allow more than one wife. Only one wife is
indicated in the horoscope of such people.
Ascendant and Moon are in common signs. Rahu and Jupiter are in 11th
house. 7th lord Jupiter is strong in 11th house; Similarly, Venus is also
exalted in the tenth house. The native had more than one wife. Where the
term remarriage is used, it means a second or third marriage after the death
or divorce of one or more of the spouses.
Shlok 40. If the seventh and second sins are afflicted by defects, their lords
are weak, then the person will remarry. This is according to Sarvartha
Chintamani.
Shlok 41. If the sinner is situated in the 7th or 8th house, Mars is in the 12th
house and in the 7th house the lord of the 7th house is not giving any
benefit in any way, then remarriage can also take place.
Shlok 42. If the lord of Navamsha, the lord of the seventh house, is weak or
weak or is in an enemy house, or is seen with a sinful eye, or is trapped
between two sinners, then the person can marry more than one woman.
Verse 43. When there are many malefic planets in the 2nd or 7th house, and
the lord of the 2nd or 7th house is aspected by sinners, a person can marry
three women.
Shlok 44. If a malefic planet is in the ascendant, or is in the 2nd or 7th
house, then the lord of the 7th is in combustion, he will have three wives.

 Shlok 45. If the lord of the seventh is in the quadrant or triangle, is in
exalted, lord or friend, and is with the lord of the 10th, then the native will
have many wives.
Verse 46. If the lords of the 11th and 7th houses are in mutual vision, are
strong or are situated in triangles, then the person has many wives.
Shlok 47. If the wife's Janma Rasi happens to be the following, there shall
be mutual goodwill and consent between the husband and the wife: (1) the
sign occupied by the lord of the 7th; (2) Navamsa in the possession of the
7th lord; (3) the exaltation sign of the lord of the 7th; (4) Sign of weakness
of the 7th house lord; (5) the sign occupied by Venus; (6) Navamsa
occupied by Venus; (7) 5th and 9th from top; Venus, the dotted sign of the
lord of the seventh house from the house occupied by Venus in the
Ashtakvarga chart.
Verse 48. If a man marries a girl, the couple will have a happy married life
One is born in the Ashtakvarga of the Moon in the sign of the lord of the
Moon's orbit or in the sign of the lord of the Ascendant.
Notes
Example:
Let us know that the Moon is in 16° Libra in the male horoscope.
Since each orbit is 3° 45', the Moon will be in the fifth house ruled by
Venus. (See Notes under Shlok 106, Chapter XVIII, for details of Room
Determination).
Let Venus stay in Gemini. Marriage with a girl born in Gemini ascendant
will be happy.
Or, the man's Ascendant is Aries and Mars, its ruler, is in Virgo. A bride
with a Virgo ascendant will bring happiness to the man.
Verse 49. Find the longitude of Venus and the sum of the lord of the
ascendant; Similarly, find the constellation of the ascendant and the sum of
the 7th longitude. Again find the sum of the longitudes of the planet which

 aspect the 7th house and the 7th lord. Wife's Nakshatra will be one of the
above mentioned three Nakshatras.
Verse 50. If a man marries a woman by any of the dik mentioned below,
their married life will be happy: (1) ruled by the lord of the 7th dik; (2) the
sign indicated by the sign occupied by the lord of the 7th house; (3) Dik
indicated by the 7th Navamsa lord; (4) the signs indicated by the sign
occupied by Venus; (5) the direction indicated by the Navamsa Rasi of
Venus; (6) the sign indicated by the seventh Rasi from Venus; (7) The sign
indicated by the lord in the 7th house from the ascendant; (8) The sign
indicated by the lord who sees the 7th house from the ascendant; (9) The
sign indicated by the lord in the 7th house from the Moon Lagna; (10) Dik
indicated by the lord who sees the 7th from the moon; (11) The dikta
indicated by the Rasi is benefic and includes a greater number of points in
the Shukra Ashtakvarga chart; (12) indicated by the Rasi where the lord of
1 stands and there are a large number of points in the Ashtakvarga chart;
and (13) Dik is indicated by the sign where the lord of the 7th house stands
and holds a large number of dots in the above chart.
Notes
Several zodiac signs and planets are given here. The question may arise as
to how to choose one of these. Take the sign with the strongest planets and
more signs. Fix the Dik of these. Marriage in that direction will bring
happiness.
Verse 51. After the decrease in the octet-square of Venus, take the sign
which has more points. If marriage is done from the direction indicated by
this sign then it will bring happiness and prosperity.
Shlok 52. If the zodiac of the lord of the seventh, the Navansh rasi of the
lord of the seventh, the rasi of Venus and the navamsa rasi of Venus is
running, then the wife will be from a far away place. If they are fixed, then
the wife will be from the neighboring place. If they are normal, it will be
neither far nor near.

 Verse 53. We have given many signs to fix the asterisk and the wife's place
of residence. A happy married life can be had if he has a girl born in the
same place as his wife and a nakshatra having more than one sign or sign.
Shlok 54. Just as the details regarding the wife are ascertained by looking at
the seventh house, the lord of the seventh and Venus etc. in the horoscope
of a man, similarly the details of the husband can be ascertained in the
horoscope of the woman. By analyzing the seventh house, the lord of the
seventh and Venus etc.
Verse 55. If an evil planet is in the eighth house in the female horoscope,
the husband will die. But if a benefic person is in the second house, she dies
before her husband. If Saturn is aspected by an evil planet and is in the
seventh house, then she will die a virgin and no one will come forward to
marry her. Although the presence of bad planets in the 7th and 8th house
indicates widowhood, the strong presence of an auspicious planet in the 9th
house averts the effect of widowhood. These characteristics should be
looked at carefully in the horoscope of the woman.
Verse 56. In the 22nd chapter of the Brihat Jataka, Varaha Mihira gives
details of some specifics about the female horoscope. They should be
carefully studied and applied and the results predicted.
Verse 57. The seventh house and Venus in the man's horoscope depict the
life of the wife. In the horoscope of the wife, the eighth house and Shani
reveal the qualities of the husband.
Verse 58. When does marriage happen - young age, middle age or old age?
In what condition does it come? These are to be ensured as follows:
Verse 59. Marriage takes place in early life if the dominant benefic lord of
the seventh house is with the lord of the ascendant; or a strong Venus
conjuncts with the lord of the ascendant; Or Venus and the lord of the 7th
house is situated in the quadrant. When the lord of the seventh house and
Venus are in the anchacha signs (3, 6, 10 and 11), then there will be
prosperity after marriage. When the lord of the seventh house is away from
the seventh and the first house, the marriage usually takes place after the
puberty has blossomed.

 Verse 60. When the lord of the seventh house is standing near the lord of
the ascendant or an auspicious house is near the first or the 7th house, the
marriage takes place very quickly.
Verse 61. When there are benefic planets in Lagna, 2nd and 7th house and
there are benefic squares in these houses or when these lords are in benefic
class, marriage will take place early in life.
Verse 62. If the lord of the seventh house is in the mountain, the lord of the
second house is strong and the lord of the ascendant is in the Mridvansh,
then the marriage takes place before puberty. Such is the opinion of the
sages.
Notes
The 46th sixth is known as Mridavansh.
Shlok 63. If the lord of the seventh house is Venus and the lord of the
second house is in anchaya and the lord of the ascendant has a good sight,
then the couple gets good luck after marriage.
Verse 64. When the lord of 7th, 2nd, Lagna and Venus are in unfavorable
house, and weak, weak or enemies are in Navamsha, then after marriage,
misfortune comes.
Verse 65. Marriage can take place in the dominant and sub-period of the
planets placed in the seventh house, the planets in the seventh house, the
lord of the 7th house, the lord of the seventh house, the lord of the seventh
house, Venus, the moon or the ascendant. K. Navansh Swami. Some
acharyas are of the opinion that the period of Rahu can also be included.
Notes
While it is quite clear that a marriage can be expected in the dasha or bhakti
of the planets related to the 7th house, which is the Kalasthan, or Shukra,
the karaka for marriage, or the Navamsa (sub-division to measure all
matters related to chart). Marriage) The logic behind the power of Rahu to
confer marriage is not clear. Yet most of the classical authorities recognize
the marriage-causing abilities of Rahu in their dasha.

 Verse 66. When Venus or the lord of the Ascendant or the Moon-sign or the
lord of the 7th house transits the 7th house, the house of the 7th house lord,
or both of these trinity signs, marriage will take place. When Jupiter transits
from the above zodiac signs in 7th, 7th or 5th and 9th house lord of
Navamsa, then marriage takes place.
Verse 67. Marriage is necessary for the strict observance of dharma, and for
the birth of the issue. The details about wife and marriage have been
prepared on the basis of Kundli.

 Marriage compatibility
Verse 1. The existence of compatibility or otherwise between a married
couple is to be ascertained on the basis of their birth stars.
Verse 2 and 3. Before deciding on marriage, the agreement should be
considered with respect to the following: Rasyadhipa, Nakshatra, Varna,
Yoni, Gana, Rishi, Bird, Deer, Vedha, Bhoot, Rajju, Vyasa, Ashtakvarga and
Shakti.
Verse 4. The author of Sarvasiddhi says about the first Rasi agreement: "A
man born in the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth zodiac signs of a
woman should not enter into marriage. If both have the same birth Rasi, the
marriage can take place. Provided that both do not belong to the same
constellation.
Notes
Counting is always done from Janma Rasi (the Radical Moon of the girl).
Verse 5. When a woman is born in an odd birth sign, then a man born in the
6th and 8th house can be taken as an alternative remedy. If she is born in
Sam Janma Rasi, then the person born in 6th should be rejected and 8th can
be accepted.
Verse 6. Madhvacharya is of the opinion that there will be loss of money
from the birth sign of a man falling in the second house from the woman's
zodiac; gives the loss of children in the 5th; The 6th causes disease, danger
and isolation; In 3, grief; And quarrels and misunderstandings in the fourth
house.
Shlok 7. Jupiter is of the opinion that a person born in 6th and 8th from
Virgo's birth sign brings loss and destruction, unless both the signs are ruled
by the same planet or are not compatible with each other.
Verse 8. If there is 'Vasya' and 'Vedha' in the birth signs of both man and
woman, then the sixth and eighth nature can be accepted as good.
Verse 9. When the birth rasi of the groom is 5th or 2nd from the birth rasi of
the bride, the compatibility does not exist. The person born in the seventh

 house can be considered very good even if the lords of both are mutual
enemies.
Verse 10. If the moon of the groom is in the 6th or 8th house from the
bridegroom then they get separated or quarrel or die. If they are born in 2nd
or 12th, they will suffer from poverty. If he is born on the 5th, his children
will die. If he is born in other zodiac signs, he will enjoy prosperity,
happiness and wealth. If the lords of both are enemies with each other or if
they have Veda defects, then 2, 5, 6, 8 and 12 will experience more
inauspicious results. If these lords are the same planet and if they have
Vasya, then this
Evils will not be felt.
Shlok 11. If it is found in the horoscope of husband and wife that Lagna, its
Navamsha, Moon and its Navamsha are Virgo, Scorpio, Taurus or Leo, then
the couple will not face any problem.
Verse 12. Capricorn and Pisces symbolize the yoni (sexual organs) of birds;
Cancer and Scorpio symbolize the reptilian sex organs; Aries, Taurus, Leo
and Capricorn represent the animals of the zodiac; And Gemini, Virgo,
Libra, Aquarius and Sagittarius testify to man.
Shlok 13. If the yoni of a man and woman as told by the Rasi are equal,
then it can be considered good; If one is pasu-yoni (animal penis) and the
other is nar-yoni (human penis), then it is appropriate; Similarly, if one is
Pasu and the other is Pakshi (bird) or Sarsaripa, it is unfavourable; If one is
human and the other is reptile or bird, it is bad and should not be accepted.
Verse 14. It is said in the Muhurta collection that a person born in 6 zodiac
signs from the 7th of the woman's birth sign can be taken for marriage. But
a person born in the sixth house can be considered only medium or
ordinary. A male born in the 4th may also be accepted if other items of
agreement are present. The rest should be discarded.
Notes

 The author often quotes various authorities. The verses in question give the
opinion of the famous book Muhurta collection.
A groom, whose Mool Moon or Janma Rasi is in the 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th,
11th or 12th house, can be considered for marriage. But if someone's birth
rasi is 6th from the girl child, then the settlement is medium or medium or
normal. The birth rasi of the bridegroom is prevalent as being the fourth
from the birth rasi of the bride provided other factors of agreement are
present.
Verse 15. If the birth constellations of the boy and the girl are the same,
then marriage is permissible provided he is not Jyeshtha, Mool, Purvashada,
Pushyami, Ashlesha, Makha, Hasta, Rohini, Dhanishtha, Shatabhisha,
Aridra or Bharani.
Shlok 16. If the birth Rasi of both the couple is same but not the same
Nakshatra, then it is good. Will issue sons and grandchildren out of
wedlock. If both have the same constellation, then fear of poison should be
avoided. If the birth signs of the couple are 7th from each other, then the
couple will be very dear. If the Rasi is biennial and also has an end in
Cancer, Vrischika or Pisces, the couple will experience poverty. Here the
first part of the chemistry ends.
Notes
When the couple's birth signs are in the 2nd and 12th position from each
other, the alliance takes place.
If the zodiac sign of the bride or groom comes at the end of Cancer, Scorpio
or Pisces then it will be rejected.
Shlok 17. If a man is born in that Rasi for which the woman has Rasi Vasya,
then it is favorable. Each Rasi has one Vasya Rasi and they are: Aries - Leo
and Vrischika; Taurus - Cancer and Libra; Gemini - Virgo, Cancer - Scorpio
and Sagittarius; Leo - Libra; Virgo Gemini and Pisces; Libra - Virgo and
Capricorn; Scorpio - Cancer. Sagittarius - Pisces; Capricorn - Aries and
Aquarius; And Aquarius and Pisces - Capricorn.

 Notes
If the Vasya Rasi of the girl's birth sign is the sign of the groom, then the
Vasya code prevails.
Shlok 18. If the birth rasi of a man is in the Vasya rasi of a girl, then it is
auspicious. The birth signs of both should be mutually Vasya Rasis. If the
couple born in Vasya zodiac is involved in gambling, then they will lead a
loving life.
Verse 19. If the lords of both the birth signs are friends, or are the same,
then the match can be accepted. Planetary friendships are dealt with as
follows: the Sun has Jupiter as its friend; Moon - Mercury and Jupiter; Mars
- Mercury and Venus; Mercury - Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn;
Jupiter - Sun, Moon, Mercury and Saturn; Venus - Mars, Mercury, Jupiter
and Saturn; and Saturn - Mercury, Jupiter and Venus.
Shlok 20. For any planet, the lord of 4th, 2nd, 5th, 8th, 9th and 12th house
from its Mool Trikona Rasi is friend. The rest are enemies.
Notes
This shloka is from Vidya Madhaviyam which is a famous work on
Muhurta or electoral astrology. The calculation of friendship, according to
this verse, is based on the statement of Satyaacharya referred to by Varaha
Mihir in the Brihat Jataka - (...), his friends from the 9th and 8th
moolatrikona.
Take the Moon for example. His zodiac sign is Taurus. The fourth is Leo
and the lord is Surya. He is a friend of Moon. 2 and 5 are ruled by Mercury.
He is a friend of Moon. Mars is the lord of the 12th house from Taurus. He
can be a friend. But Mars also rules the 7th house which is not one of the
houses mentioned in the verses. Therefore Mars is only neutral. The eighth
house from Taurus is ruled by Jupiter which is also the lord of the 11th
house, which is not included in this list. Therefore Jupiter is also neutral.
Undoubtedly Venus is the lord of the exalted Moon sign. But Venus is also
the lord of the sixth house and hence becomes indifferent to the Moon.
According to this logic, Saturn also becomes neutral.

 The following table based on this verse is given for the information of the
reader.

Planet friend neutral enemy
Sun Moon, Mars and Jupiter Mercury Saturn, Venus
Moon Sun and Mercury Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Venus None
Mars Jupiter, Moon, Sun Venus, Saturn Mercury
Mercury Sun, Venus Mars, Jupiter Saturn Moon
Jupiter Sun, Moon, Mars Saturn Mercury, Venus
Venus Mercury, Saturn Mars, Jupiter Sun, Moon
Saturn Mercury, Venus Jupiter Sun, Moon, Mars.
With this verse the Rasyadhipati thought ends.
Shlok 21. After this comes the third thought which is known as Dina Kuta.
The birth constellation is known as Janmashta; One-tenth of that is
Karmarsha; And out of that the 19th constellation is Adhanaraksha. The
third, sixth, seventh constellation should be avoided in the birth of a girl
child.
Verse 22. The groom born in the third and seventh constellation from the
birth constellation of the girl has trouble. The person born in the fifth house
gives more trouble.
Notes
According to this verse, a boy born in the third or seventh constellation of a
girl should not be considered. But those born in the fifth house are more
inauspicious.

 Shlok 23. The person born in the 88th Navamsa from the fourth quarter of
the birth constellation of a girl brings only evil. Those born in the 108th
Navamsh from the Navamsha of Virgo zodiac are equally bad.
Notes
Here Navamsa refers to the Navamsa position of the Moon and not the
position of the Ascendant.
Verse 24. If the boy is born in Nakshatra 4, 7, or 10 from the girl, it
promotes their well-being. The farther the native's birth constellation is
from Virgo, the more it will be for his happiness.
Shlok 25. If a girl is born to a boy in the fourth constellation, then it is
Mahendra; If she is born in 7th, it is known as Upendra. Mahendra gives
money and food grains and Upendra gives children.
Verse 26. When the number of constellations, numbered from the star of the
girl to the star of the boy, exceeds 15, it is very good. It is called Stridirgha.
Verse 27. The six stars from Ashwini to Aridra, from Punarvasu to Uttara,
from Hasta to Jyeshtha and from Moola to Shatabhisha rule the brahmin in
regular order,
Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, Anuloma and Pratiloma castes. Purvabhadra,
Uttarabhadra and Revathi represent Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas
respectively.
Notes
Ashwini, Bharani, Kritika, Rohinit Mrigashira and Aridra represent the
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, Anuloma and Pratiloma castes
respectively. Similarly think with Punarvasu, Hasta and Mool. The last
three stars represent Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas.
Verse 28. If both the boy and the girl belong to the same caste (varna), then
it is best. If the boy is from the upper caste, and the girl is from the lower
caste, that is also acceptable. If the girl is of upper caste and the man is of
lower class, then it is unacceptable. If one of them is Anulom and the other

 belongs to any one of the four castes, then it is prevalent. If one of them is
the inverse and the other is one of the four castes, it should be rejected.
Notes
The characters of male and female are to be determined from the
constellations given in the 27th verse.
Shlok 29. Brihaspati believes that both should be of the same caste; If the
couple belongs to two different castes, the man should be higher in the
caste; If a man wants to be low in caste, then he should be avoided. The
first is the best, the second is simple and the third is the least.
Shlok 30. Gender compatibility (Yonyanukulya) can be considered in two
ways and they are given below: If a girl is born in a feminine constellation
and a boy is in a man, the couple will be happy. If both are female
constellations, then there is a loss of money. If both are male constellations
then it should be rejected. Ashwini, Bharani, Pushyami, Ashlesha, Makha,
Uttara, Swati, Visakha, Jyeshtha, Mool, Poorva-shadha, Uttarbhadra,
Shravan, Poorvabhadra are male constellations. The remaining 13 are
feminine in sex.
Shlok 31. Another view: Ashwini, Rohini, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Hasta,
Anuradha, Shravan, Poorvabhadra, Uttarbhadra are male constellations.
Mrigashira, Moola and Shatabhisha are eunuchs; The remaining 15 are
feminine in sex. It is inauspicious for a man born in a male constellation to
marry a woman born in the same constellation. A man born in a male
constellation and a woman born in a female constellation are auspicious. A
man born in a male constellation and a woman born in a kinnar are
auspicious. A man born in a female constellation and a woman born in a
male constellation is nindya (deserving to be condemned). A man born in a
female constellation and a woman born in a female constellation are
ordinary. A man born in a female constellation and a woman born in a
transgender do not have sides. Male born in neuter star and female born in
male star should be rejected. A male born in a neuter star and female born
in a female constellation. And the male born in the eunuch and the female
in the eunuch are not favored.

 Countable

Verse 32. Revathi, Ashwini, Anuradha, Shravan, Swati, Punarvasu,
Mrigashira, Hasta, Pushyami belong to the divine category. Bharani, Pubba,
Poorva-shadha, Poorvabhadra, Aridra, Uttara, Uttara-shadha, Uttarabhadra
and Rohini belong to the human category. And the rest are of demonic
nature.
If the boy and the girl belong to the divine and demonic groups, there may
be fights and even death. If the divine group and the human group are
brought together, the yoni code will be normal.
Verse 33. If the boy and the girl have the same Gana, then it is very
auspicious. If the boy belongs to Dev Gana and the girl belongs to Kara
Gana, then it is very good. The male of Asura Gana and the female of Nar
Gana are ordinary. The male of the male group and the female of the deva
gana are inauspicious. The male of the male group and the female of the
Asura group should not be brought together.
Notes
My book Muhurta or Electoral Astrology highlights the importance of
Ganas - Dev (divine), Manush (human) and Rakshasa (devil), to which my
respected reader is referred. The qualities seem to represent different
psychological dispositions. We can roughly compare Deva with the sattvik
nature, the tamasic nature of man and the rajasic nature of the demon. In
actual practice, it has been found that unless there are strong antidote, a
Rakshasa Gana girl is usually quarrelsome and is able to keep the husband
under stress forever, even though she has all the other desirable qualities. .
If both the boy and the girl are born in the Rakshasa Gana stars, the house
will be a real battle-field, each little magnifying the big problem. If relative
peace is to be achieved, then either the husband or the wife should have the
capacity for adjustment.
However, there are some exceptions which are described in the next verse.
Verse 34. Determine the constellations for the Ascendant of the boy and the
girl. If these asterisks indicate consent by attribute; Or also wipe out the
constellations of the lord of the lunar navamsa of the couple; If there is a

 compromise between the qualities of these two Nakshatras; Or if there is a
woman-dirgah, then the objection of a boy in the human constellation to
marry a girl born in the demonic constellation can be ignored.

 Gotranukulya (agreement of gotras)

Verse 35. Ashwini, Pabba, Swati, Abhijit represent the Marichi gotra;
Bharani, Ashlesha, Visakha, Shravan are the symbols of Vashistha gotra;
Kritika, Makha, Anuradha, Dhanishtha belong to the Angirasa gotra;
Rohini, Pabba, Jyeshtha and Shatabhisha belong to the Athari gotra;
Mrigashira, Uttara, Moola, Purvabhadra belong to the Pulaha gotra; and
rebirth, mind,
Uttarashada and Revati are the symbols of Krutu Gotra. The gotras of the
couple should be ascertained from their birth constellations.
Verse 36. If the boy and the girl belong to the same gotra, it brings disaster.
If the gotras are different, prosperity will come. If the gotras of the
constellations formed according to the lagna are the same, then the result is
normal.
Notes
If there is no compatibility between gotras based on the birth nakshatras of
the boy and the girl, find out the nakshatras based on the lagna points of the
couple. If the gotras are the same here too, then the compatibility is normal
with respect to this object.

 Vihanganakulyam

Shlok 37. The bird from Ashwini to Mrigashira is a symbol of
Bharandhaka; Aridra to Pubba — Pingala; Anuradha from Uttara – Kaka
(crow); Hearing from the eldest — the rooster; And graciously Revathi - the
peacock. If the horoscope of the couple is pointing towards the same bird
then it is auspicious.
Notes
If one is compatible with the other, it is prevalent. If there is a natural
enemy of each other, it is
bad.
Verse 38. The constellations are assigned to the vaginas of some animals
Sequence starting with Ashwini: Horse, Elephant, Goat, Snake, Dog, Cat,
Sheep, Cat, Rat, Rat, Camel, She-Buffalo (Bull), Lion, She-Buffalo (Bull),
Tiger, Stag Deer, Dog, Monkey, Ox, Monkey, She-Buffalo, Horse, Woman,
Cow and Elephant. If the stars of the boy and the girl are ruled by animals
that are agreeable in nature, then the married couple will live in harmony. If
they are mutual enemies, the couple will also quarrel and separation will
occur.
Shlok 39. If the constellations of the couple come under the influence of the
following animals, then family happiness and happiness is attained. They
are elephant, horse, cow, woman, deer, goat, goat and cat. If tiger and snake
are pair animals, death can occur.
verse 40. Cats and snakes are natural enemies; So are rats and dogs; So are
the horse and the buffalo. Leo has no natural enemies. The dog, the mouse,
the cat, the dog and the snake are mutual enemies. So adding the people
ruled by them would be disastrous.
Notes
Connecting two (male and female) ruled by opposing vagrant animals will
cause trouble in family life.

 Shlok 41. According to Madhavi, tiger is the enemy of cow, dog, woman,
buffalo, deer, goat and monkey. Dog is the enemy of cow, goat, goat,
monkey and deer. Cat and mouse are mutual enemies. Elephant and deer are
enemies. horse and she-buffalo
natural enemies. The cat and the serpent are traditionally estranged. When
we consider this compatibility, we should see whether the asterisks indicate
the same animal or animals being compatible with each other. If they are
enemies, they are evil.
Verse 42. According to Jupiter, the mind controls the tiger's vagina. In the
Muhurta Ratna it is said that Chitta rules over the lion. Since this is
controversial, it is left to the discretion of the scholars to settle in some way
or the other.

 Perforation defect

Verse 43. Nakshatras can be classified into 5 parts as follows: Kantha Rohini. Aridra, Hasta, Swati, Shravan, Shatabhisha; Kati - Bharani,
Pushyami, Pubba, Anuradha, Poorvashadha, Uttara-bhadra; Position Ashwini, Ashlesha, Makha, Jyeshtha, Mool, Revathi; Siro - Mrigashira,
Chitta, Dhanishta; And Kukshi - Kritika, Punarvasu, Uttara, Vishakha,
Uttara, Purvabhadra.
Shlok 44. If the stars of the couple do not fall in the same class or division,
then it gives good results. If Nakshatra falls in the first square (Kantha), the
result is widowhood; If in cut, poverty results; If in pada, travel far away; If
in Siro - there will be death; And if kukshi - the loss of children. The
perforation defect should also be considered while constructing new
buildings.
Verse 45. Each Nakshatra has a Vedha Nakshatra which is as follows:
Ashwini - Jyeshtha, Bharani - Anuradha, Aridra - Shravan, Kritika Vishakha, Rohini - Swati, Ashlesha
- Mool, Makha - Revathi, Pushyami - Purvashadha, Punarvasu Uttarashada, Pubba - Uttarabhadra, Hasta - Shatabhisha, Uttara Poorvabhadra; Mrigashira, Chitta, Dhanishtha are mutual Vedas or mutually
repellent. The constellation of the couple should not come in the group of
Vedas.
Notes
Vedha stars are mutually repulsive. Thus Ashwini repels Jyeshtha, Aridra
repels Shravan and so on. The stars of the bride and groom should not fall
into the same repulsive group. Mrigashira, Chitta and Dhanishta are also
mutually visible stars.
Verse 46. If Veda is affliction then both husband and wife will be rake and
ruined. If there are other objects of agreement in the form of Vasya etc.,
then also the perforation will prevail. Vedha stars are relatively associated
with the sixth and seventh house.

 Geostationary

Verse 47. The 27 nakshatras are classified into 5 bhutas or elements: Prithvi
(Prithvi): Ashwini, Bharani, Kritika, Rohini, Mrigashira; Jal (water):
Aridra, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Ashlesha, Makha, Pubba; Teja (Fiery):
Uttara, Hasta, Chitta, Swati, Vishakha; Vayu (air): Anuradha, Jyeshtha,
Mool, Purvashadha, Uttara-shadha and
Hearing; and the sky (etheric): Dhanishtha, Shatabhisha, Purvabhadra,
Uttara-bhadra and Revathi.
If the horoscope of the couple is of same Bhuta then it is auspicious. If one
is airy and the other is furious, that is equally good. If one is of earth and
the other is of some other earth, that is also good. If one has a watery bhuta,
and the other has a fiery one, that is bad. If the ethereal ghost associates
with another ghost, it is prevalent.
Verse 48. Ghosts are classified into 5 as above, but some authors say that
Gemini, Virgo, denotes Earth; Taurus, Cancer and Libra - Water; Aries, Leo
and Scorpio- Fire; Capricorn and Aquarius - Air; And Sagittarius and Pisces
- Akasa.
Verse. 49. Sarvsiddhi states that ghosts should be classified as given in
verse 47. If the constellation of both is one and the same ghost, then it is
auspicious. If one is fiery and the other watery, then it is inauspicious. Other
combinations are prevalent.

Cord
Verse 50. Classify the stars into three groups of nine as given below:

First group second group third group
Ashwini Bharani Kritika

 aridra mrigashira rohini
Punarvasu Pushyami Ashlesha
Uttara Pubba Makh
Hasta Chitta Swati
eldest anuradha visakha
Original Purvashadha Uttarashada
Shatabhisha Dhanishtha Shravan
Poorvabhadra Uttarabhadra Revathi.
If the star of the couple falls in the same group, then the pair should not be
added.
Notes
If the Nakshatra of the couple falls in another group, it is called Madhyama
Rajju and the result will be death, quarrel and less and hence it is
considered very inauspicious.
If the constellation falls in the first and third house, then it is called Rajju
and it also brings calamities.
Vayunukulya (Age)
Verse 51. If the groom is three times older than the bride, he is considered
good; If he's a two-timer, it's walkable; If he is older than only a few years it
results in grief. If the bride is older, the family will become extinct.

 Ashtakvarga
Verse 52. If the birth rasi of the boy falls in a zodiac which is more point in
the ashtakvarga of the moon of the girl's horoscope, then it is good.
Similarly, if the birth sign of a girl falls in that zodiac, which is more Bindu
in the Ashtakvarga of the boy's Moon, then that is equally good.
Shlok 53. Find the position in which the Moon is situated in the girl's
horoscope. If the birth sign of the boy falls in the sign of the lord of this
room, then the compatibility is good. The same is true with respect to the
horoscope of the boy.
Notes
According to the Ashtakvarga scheme, each zodiac is divided into 8 parts or
chambers of 3° 45' whose lords are Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus,
Mercury, Moon and Lagna respectively. Suppose the Moon is in 11° 40'
Aquarius in the case of the bride. This will be the fourth chamber, which is
ruled by the Sun. If in any Rasi the man of the bridegroom falls in the sign
Leo i.e. Leo, ruled by the Sun, then it is good.

 Chittanukulya

Verse 54. If the couple loves each other, they can enter into marriage, even
if there is no agreement by other means. This is very important in case of
marriage.
Shlok 55. One who truly loves a girl, should marry her. Pure love is greater
than any other virtue.
Notes
Shlokas 55 and 56 are suggestive and reflect the wisdom of the ancestors in
giving priority to mutual love over any other astrological factor. But love
for each other must be born from their hearts, and not just by accidental
desire. When such pure love is seen between a boy and a girl, then no
astrological thought should interfere to prevent such marriage. But in
modern times, except in very rare cases, it is not love that seems to weigh.
It is lust which is momentary and disappears as soon as the initial
attachment is over. So today we see how many tragedies involve young men
and women.

 Other things

Verse 56. Count from the star of the girl to the boy. Multiply this number by
5 and divide the product by 7. The remainder is expenditure or expenditure.
If again counted from the birth-star of the groom and the same process is
repeated, the remainder indicates 'aya' or profit or income.
Verse 57. If income exceeds expenditure, marriage brings all round
prosperity. If the expenses are high, the couple will experience great
poverty.
Verse 58. Count up the asterisks of the boy and the girl from Ashwini and
complete them. Add 13 to this sum. Subtract 32 from the total number.
Divide the difference by 5.
If the remainder is 1, then the result is the children's earnings; 2, the death
of one of the pairs; 3, long illness; and 4, prosperity. If even after adding 13,
the sum is not 32, then counting should be done from the birth constellation
to Ashwini.
Shlok 59. Calculate the birth constellations of the couple from Ashwini.
Add the two digits and subtract the sum from 5. If the remainder is 1, then
prosperity is indicated; If 2, normal progress; If 3, plagues; If there is 4,
wealth and 5, then disasters.
Notes
Some people are of the opinion that the principle given in this verse has
been given only to the Chola country.
Verse 60. If the birth constellations of male and female fall in the first
category - Aridra, Hasta, Poorva-shadha, Uttarashada - then there will be a
lot of progress; If they fall into the second category – Kritika, Rohini,
Mrigashira, Makha, Pabba, Uttara, Anuradha, Jyeshtha, Moola, Dhanishta,
Shatabhisha, Purva-bhadra – will follow prosperity; And if they fall into the
third category – Ashwini, Bharani, Punarvasu, Pusbyami, Ashlesha, Chitta,

 Swati, Vishakha, Uttarashada, Shravan, Revathi – expenses and debts will
come.
Comments Rinanukulya ends with this verse.
Verse 61. The anukulyas (sources of consent) described here are very
effective in results. The effects of some of them are described elsewhere
and are noted below.
verse 62. Dinah agreement indicates that the couple will live long;
Mahendra brings in children and grandchildren; Woman gives long life to
husband; Yoni bestows unfailing prosperity; Gaana makes pairs mutually
maximal; And Vyasa (age) meeting brings more friendship.
Verse 63. Out of the various sangat described, 4 are based on the birth rasi
and each birth rasi is based on the lord of Shakti (love) and Vyasa (age); and
are based on 16 constellations. Thus we have 23 items or sources of
agreement in total.
Verse 64. Some of the accompaniments suggested above are strong and
others are
weak.
Verse 65. Attention has to be paid to their relative importance. according to
the task
Sarvartha-siddhi, 20 items of compatibility are to be seen. Of these, with
respect to the Janma Rasi, the lords of the Janma Rasi, Vasya, Mahendra
and Yoni are the most important. Therefore they should be studied carefully.
Verse 66. The most important things to be considered for matrimonial
purposes are Janam Rasi, lord of Janma Rasi, Vasya, Mahendra, Gana,
Yoni, Dina and Stridirgha.
Shlok 67. According to Muhurtabharan, Janma Rasi, lord of Janma Rasi,
Mahendra, Yoni and Vasya are the five most important sources of
agreement that should be
Considered.

 Verse 68. Madhav has given 15 things in total. Of these, the lords of
Mahendra, Yoni, Janma Rasi, Janma Rasi are the most important. In
addition, Brahmins should look at the gotras in which they are born. Others
should consider agreement regarding varnas in addition to the five already
mentioned.
Shlok 69. The five items of agreement, viz., Vasya, Mahendra, Yoni, Janam
Rasi and Janam Rasi's lord have been found to be very effective by
experience by many learned writers on this subject. Therefore, at least these
five must be observed before the settlement of the marriage. Apart from
these, brahmins should look at their gotras and other castes (varnas) which
are special to them.
Notes
Giving the opinion of other eminent officials, the question of consent in the
matter of marriage is described in detail. In fact the author gives 23 items
for consideration. But in this verse he is practical enough to suggest that at
least five things are very important and must be observed before the
marriage is settled.
With due respect to the great writer, I must file my humble distinction with
him. All these things are based on either birth nakshatra or birth sign. In
actual practice, however, I feel that there must be inherent compatibility in
the horoscope of the man and woman if the marriage is to be successful.
The author does not allot any units to the different kutas as has been done in
the works on Muhurta. I appreciate to my respected readers the chapter on
marriage in my book Muhurta or Electoral Astrology, which discusses this
topic in great detail.

 Effects of transit
Verse 1. Varaha Mihira in his work Brihat Samhita has described in detail
the effect of planets in transit. I will briefly describe here what he has given
in that famous book.
Verse 2. When the Sun transits the Janma Rasi (the sign occupied by the
Moon at the time of birth), fatigue, loss of good name and status, painful
work and diseases afflict the native; In the second house, there is loss of
money, diseases in the eyes and deceit from others. In the third house, the
person will experience promotion to a new post, destruction of enemies,
increase in wealth and good health; In the fourth house, in the matter of
enjoying the company of the wife, you will have to face obstacles and will
suffer from stomach diseases.
Verse 3. Troubles and diseases from enemies in the fifth house; In the sixth
house, freedom from disease, the fall of enemies and the quenching of all
mental troubles; Fatigue, helplessness and stomach-related diseases due to
travel in the seventh house; In the 8th distraction for women and women
and fear from rulers and diseases.
verse 4. In the 9th house, all kinds of calamities, feelings of deprivation and
serious diseases, and breakdowns in one's profession; 10th success in all
undertakings and victories in all quarters; Promotion to a high position in
the 11th house, general prosperity, freedom from diseases and tendency to
do good deeds; And in the twelfth house, the person will not be able to get
the results of any good deeds.
Verse 5. When the Moon transits in its original position, it brings to his
satisfaction nutritious food, increases bed rest and gains valuable things; In
the 2nd house, the Moon causes trouble or obstacles for all good deeds, loss
of fame and money; In the third house, having fun with women, wearing
good clothes brings happiness and new wealth; In the fourth house, fear of
others; And in all kinds of 5th crisis interruption of the journey.
verse 6. In the 6th gain of wealth, general happiness, peace with enemies
and peace of all diseases; In the seventh house, nutritious and satisfying

 food, gifts from others, money gains, restful sleep and enjoyment of
women; In the 8th trouble by fire; stomach diseases and fear of
imprisonment in the ninth; Gains from Govt in 10th; 11th meeting with
relatives and increase in wealth; And in 12th there is loss of money and
obstacles in all work.
Verse 7. When Mars transits the birth moon, there are obstacles in all
undertakings; In the second house, fear from rulers, suffering from thieves
and fire, suffering due to enemies, illness in the body due to mental and
physical sufferings; In the third house, the acquisition of precious metals,
the grace of Lord Subrahmanya and the easy destruction of enemies; In 4,
bad . concerned with
Men, Stomach diseases, High fever, Unconscious flow of semen.
Shlok 8. Mars in the fifth house gives trouble from enemies, sorrow from
children, fear from disease. Acquisition of precious metals like copper and
gold in the sixth house, fear of quarrels and misunderstandings, new break
from enemies; misunderstanding with wife in 7th house, stomach and eye
diseases; Blood pressure and resultant diseases, fear of defamation, mental
depression due to serious injury or dismemberment of body in eighth house.
Verse 9. Loss of money, disease and defeat in the 9th house; In the tenth
house, profit in all respects; In the 11th, the height and general happiness of
a village chief; And in twelfth all kinds of troubles, wastage of money,
diseases caused by heat, blood pressure and diseases in eyes.
Verse 10. When Mercury transits retrograde Moon, it indicates quarrels
with relationships and loss of money due to misunderstanding, defamatory
or illegal words and writings and travel to distant places; In the second, the
fresh acquisition of wealth and influence and general prosperity; in the third
the fear of the enemies and the anger of the rulers; Money gain, prosperity
of relatives and general progress of family in 4th house; In the 5th house
there is a quarrel with wife and children.
Verse 11 and 12. Mercury transiting 6th house indicates success in all
things, general luck and rapid promotion; Fights in 7th house: Victory in 8th

 house, happiness from children, receipt of clothes, increase in income,
mental peace and increase in learning; All kinds of diseases in the ninth
house; Destruction of enemies in the tenth house, wealth and happiness
from a woman; In the 11th auspicious speech, fresh gains, happiness and
success in everything, better and closer relations with wife and children;
And in the twelfth house there is trouble due to enemies and diseases.
Verse 13. Birth of Jupiter Transit in the Moon involves loss of money,
demotion, quarrels and mental despair; In the second house, attainment of
wealth, destruction of enemies, happiness from women; in the third, some
change in profession, hindrance in all work; Unhappiness due to relatives in
the fourth house, desire for peace from all around; In the 5th house, the
receipt of vehicles in the form of horses or oxen, ornaments and children,
happiness from women, clothes and housing; In the sixth house, the
tendency to feel sad in spite of having everything to make one comfortable.
Notes
Vehicles in the form of horses or oxen are represented by horse-drawn
carriages or carts drawn by oxen.
Shlok 14. From the Moon in the seventh house, Jupiter brings cleverness in
speech, sharpness of intellect, accomplishment of all tasks and attainment
of wealth, happiness.
sexual pleasure; in the 8th, unbearable grief, disease, loss of independence,
overwork and fatigue; In the ninth house, profit, happiness with wife and
children, attainment of authority and achievements and success in all tasks;
Loss of position or profession, wealth and fruitlessness of all works in the
tenth house.
Shlok 15. The transit of Jupiter in the 11th house indicates grace, success in
all work and progress in a specific place in life; and fatigue caused by long
walks and serious hardships in life in 12th.
Verse 16. The transit of Venus in the natal Moon signifies healthy food,
enjoyment with wife, receipt of fragrant things, fresh sleep material and

 valuable clothes and the pleasures that come from them.
Verse 17. Venus in the 2nd house gives wealth and grain, ornaments and
flowers, favor of rulers and happiness to family members; In the third
house, respect and honor of one's opinion, gain, respect from others, receipt
of clothes and destruction of enemies; And in the fourth house,
reconciliation and immense prosperity with relatives.
Shlok 18. The transit of Venus in the 5th house indicates wealth gain, birth
of children, help from relatives, satisfaction for elders; suffering from
enemies and diseases in the sixth house; in the 7th, trouble and danger from
women; In the eighth house, getting happiness from a woman, household
utensils and ornaments in the family; In the ninth gain of wealth, the fruit of
generous and charitable works and happiness and joy with women.
Verse 19. The transit of Venus in the tenth house causes rivalry and quarrels
and humiliations; In the 11th house, good food, the receipt of fragrant
things and the favor of relatives; And in the twelfth house, there are many
ways to get money and clothes and ornaments.
Verse 20. Saturn's transiting birth moon causes fear of poison and fire, loss
of relatives and friends, exile in distant lands, discord with loved ones,
misunderstanding due to money related transactions and travel to distant
places.
Verse 21. Saturn in the second house, loss of wealth, happiness and health;
decreased desire; Elephant in the third house, attainment of buffalo, good
health and successful completion of all tasks.
Shlok 22. Saturn in the fourth house brings clouds in the mind, separation
from wife and own money; quarrel with everyone; Grief arising from the
death of a child in the fifth house.
Verse 23. Suppression of enemies and diseases in the sixth house; In the
seventh house, closeness and distant travels with female servants; In the 8th
misunderstanding and extreme helplessness with his own people. Saturn in
the ninth house, enmity with all, imprisonment or bondage, obstruction in
virtuous works and heartache; Success in the tenth house, loss of money

 and education, and success in one's actions (karma phala).
Shlok 24. Saturn in the 11th house, intimacy with other women, immense
benefits, increase in respect and authority; And in the 12th, a series of
intermittent sorrows and heavy calamities in life.
Verse 25. The planets contribute both good and evil to the native during
their transit. But, they can be made to do good by atonement, offerings etc.
Verse 26. Sun and Mars give their transit effect when they are in the
beginning of the zodiac; Jupiter and Venus in the central part; And in the
last part the Moon and Saturn. Mercury exerts its influence on the entire
zodiac.
Notes
While considering the transit, it should be kept in mind that unfavorable
planets are not completely inauspicious when they are aspected by
auspicious houses. Similarly, when planets placed in a favorable position
are aspected by sinful planets, they do not give completely auspicious
results. If the dominant planets conjunct or aspect with the ruling Dasha or
Bhukti lord, during the transit, the good effects of the directional lord
increase or delay and the bad effects intensify or diminish depending on the
nature of the transiting planet. For example, if one has a sub-period of a
Yogakaraka planet, Saturn in transit or in the company of the sub-lord may
delay the conduct of Raja Yoga.
Verse 27. If the planets are unfavorable in the transit, they should be
appeased by wearing clothes of the colors of the planets, worshiping them
with flowers of different colors suitable for the planets: Sun and Mars - red;
Moon and Venus - white; Saturn - dark; Jupiter - yellow; and Mercury green; And by chanting and doing home the mantras of the planets.
Shlok 28. Now we will indicate the nature of gems or precious stones ruled
by different planets, things to be donated, nature of ceremonies to be
performed and things to be avoided when planets are in transit.
Verse 29. Sun controls – Ruby, Moon – Mukta, Mars – Vidrum, Mercury –
Garuda, Jupiter – Pushyrag, Venus – Vajra, Satman – Indra – Blue, Rahu

 - Gomedhika and Ketu - Vaidurya.
Verse 30. When the Sun is in an unfavorable transit position, then offer a
cow of Kapila color; for the moon, a conch shell; for Mars, a red bull; For
Mercury, gold; For Jupiter, yellow silk; Venus for the silver and white
horse; for Shani, a black cow; Rahu for iron and sheep; For Ketu, an
elephant and a sheep.
Verse 31. The deities and brahmins will be adorned. The elders should be
obeyed. One should listen to the Vedas and Puranas. should do holmes and
Witness. The mind should be kept pure. Vedic chants should be listened to
and the offerings should be made in due course. If this is done, the
unfavorable planets, no matter how afflicted they are, will do well.
Verse 32. Planets transiting in unfavorable places will not do any harm if
one resorts to bathing every day, then takes the help of ritual bath
prescribed by Badrayana; By taking a dip in the holy water and pouring the
medicinal water of the appropriate planet on the body.
Verse 33. Even a ruler should avoid the following when the planets are
unfavourable: abnormal and rotating during late hours; engage in hunting;
Declaring war and committing any risky act; set out on a distant journey;
riding on elephants, horses and other dangerous vehicles; and go to
another's house.
Verse 34. To explain the effects of transit, three factors must be considered,
viz., the position of the transit, vedha and veparita vedha.
Verse 35. Prepare the Ashtakvarga of all the planets and mark the position
favorable to the Moon in each. are called transits. When a planet is in transit
position, its effect can be nullified by any other planet residing in a Vedha
Rasi from above. So its good effects will be greatly reduced. When a planet
is in vedha position with respect to another planet in transit, the effect of
vedha planet will be reversed by the planet in transit position. This is
known as Viparita Vedha. Hence the bad effects will also be greatly
reduced.

 Verse 36. All the planets transiting in the 11th position from the natal Moon
do only good. Sun is favorable in 3, 6 and 10; Saturn is favorable in 3 and
6; Mars in 1, 3, 6, 7 and 10;
Venus at all places except 6, 7 and 10; Jupiter in 2, 5, 7 and 9; Mercury in 2,
4, 6, 8 and 10; The planets should not be afflicted by a planet with a vedha
position. This is the opinion of Shripati.
Verse 37. When Sun transits 11, 3, 10, 6 (note the order) from the natal
Moon and when Saturn does not cause any Vedas due to other planets
except 5, 9, 4, 12 (note the order) If so, the Sun only does good.
Notes
When Sun is transiting in 11, 3, 10 and 6, the vedha position of 11 is 5, that
of 3 is 9, that of 10 is 4, that of 6 is 12. If a planet is in its vedha position,
then the planet will be in transit position. To get afflicted.
Verse 38. When the Moon transits 7, 1, 6, 11, 10, 3 and when there are no
planets
Mercury does only well in 2, 5, 12, 8, 9, 4 (in this particular order).
Notes
Moon does not have Vedas from Mercury. The position of the vedha is 2 for
7, for 1 - 5, for 6 - 12, for 11 - 8, for 10 - 9, for 3 - 4.
Verse 39. When Mars transits in 3, 11, 6 and no other planet is in its Veda
position - 12, 5, 9, then he only does good. Saturn is like Mars.
Verse 40. When Mercury transits in 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 11 and there is no planet
other than Moon
Captures 5, 3, 9, 1, 8 and 11, he gives only good. Moon does not cause
Vedas.
Shlok 41. When Jupiter transits in 2, 11, 9, 5, 8 and no other planet transits
in 12, 8, 10, 4, 3 for Vedha affliction, then he only does good.
Verse 42. When Venus transit is in 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12 and 11, and no other

 The planet is in 8, 7, 1, 10, 9, 5, 11, 6, 3 and causes Veda, he only does
good.
Shlok 43. If transiting planets are afflicted by vedha, they do not give good
effects. Similarly, a planet in unfavorable and vedha position may countervictimize another planet in vedha rasi, giving only good contribution. In
Viparita Vedha, we have Vama Vedha.
Shlok 44. Even if a planet transits in a favorable sign, it does not do any
good if it is in an enemy or debilitated sign or is associated with or
aspecting an enemy planet.
Verse 45. Planets in transit position are affected differently by vedha and
vice versa. These are detailed in some other works and are included to
clarify the facts.
Verse 46. When the Sun transits in a Vedic sign (3, 6, 10, 11), the Veda
signs are
Sequence 9, 12, 4, 5.
Notes
If the Sun transits the third position from the Moon of birth, then the Vedha
Rashi is 9. Similarly for 6 it is 12, for 10 it is 4 and for 11 it is 5. When the
Sun is passing through the third (Vedhya) from the Radix. Moon, he is the
giver of auspicious results. If at the same time a planet transits from the
original Moon to the ninth (Vedha), the favorable results of the Sun are
negated.
Verse 47. Vedha and Vedha Rashi for the Moon 1-5, 3-9, 6-12,
1-2, 10-4 and 11-8.
Notes
If the transiting Moon is in the third (Vedhya) from the Moon of birth, it can
give good results. If any other planet is simultaneously transiting in the
ninth (Vedha), the good effects are nullified.
Verse 48. For Mars and Shani, Vedhya and Vedha are the zodiac signs 3-12,
6-9 and 115.

 Shlok 49. The signs of Veda and Vedha for Mercury are 2-5, 4-7, 6-9, 8-1,
10-8 and 1112. 2-12, 5-4, 9-10, 7-3 and 11-8 for Jupiter.
Verse 50. The signs of Veda and Vedha for Venus are 2-7, 3-1, 4-10, 5-9, 85, 9-4, 1112 and 12-6.
Shlok 51. For Rahu and Ketu, the position of Veda is 3, 6 and 11, while for
Shani and the position of Veda is 12, 9, 5. Any planet which has Vedas
cannot give beneficial results.
Verse 52. Shani does not make the Sun the Vedas, nor does the Sun afflict
Shani.
Similarly Moon and Mercury are not mutually afflicted.
Verse 53. Even if the planets are in a favorable position of transit, they do
not contribute well when afflicted by the Vedas. Similarly, though the
Vedha Rashi may be unfavourable, a planet placed there does not do any
evil when it is counter-opted by the planet placed in its Vedha Rashi, but
bestows only good.
Shlok 54. If an astrologer does not know the principles of vedha, viparita
vedha and planetary strength, dares to predict transit effects, his predictions
will never come true.
Verse 55. In this chapter, we have described the effect of planets in the
calculation of transits from the Moon. This great sage Vasistha has given it
to his disciples, and should not be advised to anyone except good students.
It is to be cherished as a great secret.

 Diseases: Causes and Treatment
verse 1. Diseases have been discussed by me in Chapter XIII. Now I will
describe the primary causes and remedial measures for the diseases given in
Karma Vipak.
Notes
According to ancient Hindu beliefs, certain types of diseases like
tuberculosis, cancer, etc. Karma Vyadhi are the result of some forbidden
acts that the person must have done in his previous birth. Western medicine
men try to find the causes of every disease that occurs within the body, and
they are treated by drugs, surgery, etc. Yet most Hindus believe in the
ancient theory of our suffering, physical, mental, etc. . This life is the result
of some act done in our past life or life. Karma Vipaka is an ancient work
that lists various diseases, how they arise and what remedial measures,
mainly consisting of chanting, homa, donation etc., should be adopted.
Western medical science has not and cannot say the final word on malaise
and its treatment. What the sages say has to be considered with respect and
faith.

 Rajayakshma (consumption)

Verse 2. The reason for the consumption of terrible disease is that in the
previous birth, the person must have committed violence with Brahmins,
hated the gurus and elders or would have indulged in sexual indulgences
during the eclipse. There are ways to chant Sahasra Naam, Rudra Sukta,
Andragni and Sukta along with Havan; And giving clothes as a gift.

 capacity (capacity)

Verse 3. According to the Smritis, the main cause of Karsya or weakness is
theft of food. As a remedy, an idol of Shiva should be offered.

 leprosy (leprosy)

Verse 4. The primary cause of leprosy can be found to be killing Brahmins,
enjoying the wife of a guru, engaging in the illegal sale of drugs or
attempting to poison a trusted person. Remedies for its prevention are:
chanting of Rudra Sukta, Ayusukta and offering idols of Sun and bulls made
of gold to revered Brahmins and performing Kushmanda Homa.
Shvetakushtha (white leprosy)
Verse 5. In addition to the reasons specified in the previous verse, the
misuse of large quantities of cotton rolls, cloth and bronze utensils would
also result in suffering from white leprosy.
The remedial measures are also the same as those given in verse 4.

 Visarpa (Serpis)

Verse 6. The killing of serpents or the killing of them by others is the cause
of a person suffering from Visarp. The remedy is Nagdan or gifting the
image of the snake specified in the memory.
Pandu's disease (leucoderma)
Verse 7. Stealing the wealth of gods and brahmins and eating forbidden
food gives rise to leucoderma. Performing Kushmanda Yagya and offering
gold are palliative.

 diarrhea (dysentery)

Verse 8. The cause of diarrhea is the destruction of ponds and wells.
According to the sages, the remedy is the recitation of Rudrasukta and
Varunsukta.

 Grahani (facial disease)

Verse 9. Tearing off lips, breaking teeth and biting the tongues of others;
talking ill and degrading about elderly persons; Lying and being a false
witness is the cause of sickness on the face. Remedies are Kushmanda
Homa, Gayatri chanting and donating a gold figure of elephant, grains and
medicines.

 Arsa disease (hemorrhoids)

Verse 10. Due to piles, the wealth of the learned and the blind is to be
misused; Stealing food, having sex on forbidden days and killing cows. The
remedy is to offer the figure of a cow made of gold.

 Eye disease (eye disease)

Verse 11. Eye diseases are the result of ungratefulness, looking down upon
other women and hurting the eyes of others. The remedy is to give Payasa
prepared from milk or pulses, gold, ghee and perform the Garuda figure and
Homas and chant the Eye-protection Sukta or Eye protection mantra with
devotion.

 Nakandya (Partial Blindness)

Verse 12. Nakandhya disease is caused due to injury or blindness in the
eyes of the cow.
The remedy is to give the image of Gopal in charity.

 Kama Roga (ear disease)

Verse 13. Bite-biting, tearing the ears of others and obstructing the actions
of others are the causes of ear disease. Giving land, gold, grains and woolen
goods in charity and chanting Surya Mantra is palliative.

 Jihwa Roga (Linguistic Disease)

Verse 14. The cause of language disease is to scold the gurus and elders
People tell lies, hurt others, tear others' tongues. Donating food grains,
medicines, performing Kushmanda Yagya and chanting Rahu Mantra or
other hymns are its remedies.

 Gout

Verse 15. Criticizing pious and respected people, hating parents and
teachers and stealing food are the causes of arthritis. Remedial measures are
donating an image of a deer made of copper with clothes and nutritious
food and reciting or chanting the Vayu Sukta and other Vayu mantras.

 Sula (stomach ache problem)

Verse 16. Having relations with virgins, cattle, widows and maidservants;
Consuming forbidden food, sacrificing essential rituals, cutting back, killing
a person with poison or sharp weapons are the root causes of colic. The
remedies are to donate sesame seeds and Padma and a trident made of silver
or gold.

 Gulma (spleen disease)

Shlok 17. Deep enmity and misbehavior towards Guru, jealousy and misuse
of other's food are the main causes of Gulma disease. Homa, Rudrasukta
and Vayusukta with Andragni-sukta, chanting of Gayatri mantra and gifting
the image of Ganapati are its remedies.

 Prameha:

Verse 18. Sex with animals, unmarried virgins, wives of teachers and
widows, hatred of teachers, stealing food from Brahmins and causing
suffering to others are the causes of Prameha. Apart from these, illicit
relations with mother, mother-in-law and brother's wife cause Madhu Meha
or diabetes.
Verse 19. Gift of home and gold, cow, water and food and chanting of
Varuna Mantra gives relief in diabetes.

 Mahodara (Dropsy)

Verse 20. The cause of this disease is sex with the wife of the guru and the
cause of abortion. The remedy is chanting the Rudra Sukta and Varuna
Sukta and giving the image of a crocodile and water in charity.
Urinary Crucha (Urinary Disease)
Shlok 21. Physical intimacy with unmarried virgins, animals and widows
and with misbehaving Brahmins is the main cause of urinary diseases. The
remedies are gifting gingeli seeds and lotus flowers. Doing 'Home' with
insufficient Agni leads to Agnimandya. The palliative is the chanting of the
Agni Mantra.

 Fistula

Verse 22. Ignoring the advice of elders and gurus and having sex with the
guru's wife causes fistula - remedies are ornaments, image of elephant made
of silver, gold and gold and chanting of Gayatri Mantra, Aditya-sukta and
Rudrasukta Doing .

 madness

Shlok 23. The reason for the disease of widowhood is theft of fruits.
Immortals are done according to the orders of the Smritis.

 Kantha Roga (throat disease)

Verse 24. Theft of public property suffers from a disease of the throat.
There are ways to offer Grahasanti and gems.

 Cirrhosis (headache)

Verse 25. The reason for the disease of the head is hatred towards the
brahmins. The remedy is the gift of repentance and the sacred thread.

 Teardrop:

Verse 26. This disease is caused by destroying Ashwatha and other sacred
trees and injuring cows. The remedy involves gifting a red cow.

 Apsamara (epilepsy)

Verse 27. The cause of Apsara is the killing of Acharyas and Acharyas.
Chanting, charity and other measures are the remedies mentioned in the
memory of the sages.

 Mookathwa and Maniya (stupidity and madness)
Verse 28. To ridicule old persons, to be always engrossed in pleasures and
to keep an eye on the wives of others and to break promises leads to folly,
madness etc. The suggested remedy is to gift an image of an elephant.

 Fever

Verse 29. Fever arising from cold and heat and recurrent fever are caused
by intimidation of others with the help of a dog. The treatment is the
performance of abhisheka to Vishnu and Shiva and the chanting of the
Panchadurga mantra and the Rudrasukta.
Notes
The consecration of Shiva and Vishnu is said to be more suitable for fever
arising from cold and heat. Treatments other than the two listed here are
often recommended for intermittent fever.

 Daha (thirst)

Verse 30. Burning or excessive thirst arises because of sins such as intimacy
with the wife of the guru. There is a way to give water to the thirsty.

 Ulcer disease

Verse 31. Stealing vegetables, obstructing the speech of others,
misbehaving with others and immoral relations with unwanted women and
destroying trees cause ulcers. The remedy is to offer gems or pearls or
precious rings.

 blisters on hands feet

Verse 32. Blisters on hands and feet are respectively due to abortion and
having an immoral relationship with the wife of the guru. Giving gems as a
gift to Brahmins is the remedy.

 childless

Shlok 33. The reasons why no one has any problem are: killing children,
eating eggs, hating the children of gurus and others, killing animals,
creating differences between mother and child, killing small pets and annual
Shradh not function. The remedy is to offer an idol of a cow made of gold.

 Anorexia

Verse 34. Donating anything without due respect and devotion will lead to a
disease called "anorexia". By betraying the person who believes in the
native, a disease called Charadhi occurs. Let the learned men suggest
suitable remedies for these two.

 Mooktwa (stupid)

Verse 35. Plagiarism causes the disease of dumbness. The remedy is
offering the image of Goddess Saraswati.

 Kamilla (blindness)

Verse 36. The cause of Kamila's disease is to eat food without washing feet
and clean hands. Offering the idol of Garuda is the remedy.

 Intestinal enlargement (intestinal discomfort)

Verse 37. This disease is caused by obstructing the performance of Yagya.
Offering the idol of Vishnu ji is the right way.
Verse 38. Gulma should be gifted in iron vessels for disease. For leprosy,
silver coins and images; for gout (rheumatism) cow's milk; Gold coins
dipped in cow's ghee for eye diseases; For body aches - bedding, pillows
and cots; For diseases of the stomach — fertile plots of land.
Verse 39. For Aras (hemorrhoids) and Bhagandhara (fistula), one should
give gifts of gold and diamonds and chant the Rudrasukta. For all diseases,
Sahasranama, Satrudreya and Rudrasukta should be chanted, in addition to
the special ones recommended in their proper places.
Verse 40. Kings and rich people should set up free hospitals. Common
people should at least give food and medicine to the sick. Then their
diseases will go away.
Shlok 41. The 'gift of health' is the most important of all gifts. If a person
wants to remain healthy by getting rid of diseases, then he should help the
patient with food and medicines.